







Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net











    This etext was produced from Space Science Fiction May 1953.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed.









[Illustration]









SECOND VARIETY





BY PHILIP K. DICK





ILLUSTRATED BY EBEL



    The claws were bad enough in the first place--nasty, crawling

    little death-robots. But when they began to imitate their

    creators, it was time for the human race to make peace--if it

    could!





The Russian soldier made his way nervously up the ragged side of the

hill, holding his gun ready. He glanced around him, licking his dry

lips, his face set. From time to time he reached up a gloved hand and

wiped perspiration from his neck, pushing down his coat collar.



Eric turned to Corporal Leone. "Want him? Or can I have him?" He

adjusted the view sight so the Russian's features squarely filled the

glass, the lines cutting across his hard, somber features.



Leone considered. The Russian was close, moving rapidly, almost

running. "Don't fire. Wait." Leone tensed. "I don't think we're

needed."



The Russian increased his pace, kicking ash and piles of debris out of

his way. He reached the top of the hill and stopped, panting, staring

around him. The sky was overcast, drifting clouds of gray particles.

Bare trunks of trees jutted up occasionally; the ground was level and

bare, rubble-strewn, with the ruins of buildings standing out here and

there like yellowing skulls.



The Russian was uneasy. He knew something was wrong. He started down

the hill. Now he was only a few paces from the bunker. Eric was

getting fidgety. He played with his pistol, glancing at Leone.



"Don't worry," Leone said. "He won't get here. They'll take care of

him."



"Are you sure? He's got damn far."



"They hang around close to the bunker. He's getting into the bad part.

Get set!"



The Russian began to hurry, sliding down the hill, his boots sinking

into the heaps of gray ash, trying to keep his gun up. He stopped for

a moment, lifting his fieldglasses to his face.



"He's looking right at us," Eric said.



       *       *       *       *       *



The Russian came on. They could see his eyes, like two blue stones.

His mouth was open a little. He needed a shave; his chin was stubbled.

On one bony cheek was a square of tape, showing blue at the edge. A

fungoid spot. His coat was muddy and torn. One glove was missing. As

he ran his belt counter bounced up and down against him.



Leone touched Eric's arm. "Here one comes."



Across the ground something small and metallic came, flashing in the

dull sunlight of mid-day. A metal sphere. It raced up the hill after

the Russian, its treads flying. It was small, one of the baby ones.

Its claws were out, two razor projections spinning in a blur of white

steel. The Russian heard it. He turned instantly, firing. The sphere

dissolved into particles. But already a second had emerged and was

following the first. The Russian fired again.



A third sphere leaped up the Russian's leg, clicking and whirring. It

jumped to the shoulder. The spinning blades disappeared into the

Russian's throat.



Eric relaxed. "Well, that's that. God, those damn things give me the

creeps. Sometimes I think we were better off before."



"If we hadn't invented them, they would have." Leone lit a cigarette

shakily. "I wonder why a Russian would come all this way alone. I

didn't see anyone covering him."



Lt. Scott came slipping up the tunnel, into the bunker. "What

happened? Something entered the screen."



"An Ivan."



"Just one?"



Eric brought the view screen around. Scott peered into it. Now there

were numerous metal spheres crawling over the prostrate body, dull

metal globes clicking and whirring, sawing up the Russian into small

parts to be carried away.



"What a lot of claws," Scott murmured.



"They come like flies. Not much game for them any more."



Scott pushed the sight away, disgusted. "Like flies. I wonder why he

was out there. They know we have claws all around."



A larger robot had joined the smaller spheres. It was directing

operations, a long blunt tube with projecting eyepieces. There was not

much left of the soldier. What remained was being brought down the

hillside by the host of claws.



"Sir," Leone said. "If it's all right, I'd like to go out there and

take a look at him."



"Why?"



"Maybe he came with something."



Scott considered. He shrugged. "All right. But be careful."



"I have my tab." Leone patted the metal band at his wrist. "I'll be

out of bounds."



       *       *       *       *       *



He picked up his rifle and stepped carefully up to the mouth of the

bunker, making his way between blocks of concrete and steel prongs,

twisted and bent. The air was cold at the top. He crossed over the

ground toward the remains of the soldier, striding across the soft

ash. A wind blew around him, swirling gray particles up in his face.

He squinted and pushed on.



The claws retreated as he came close, some of them stiffening into

immobility. He touched his tab. The Ivan would have given something

for that! Short hard radiation emitted from the tab neutralized the

claws, put them out of commission. Even the big robot with its two

waving eyestalks retreated respectfully as he approached.



He bent down over the remains of the soldier. The gloved hand was

closed tightly. There was something in it. Leone pried the fingers

apart. A sealed container, aluminum. Still shiny.



He put it in his pocket and made his way back to the bunker. Behind

him the claws came back to life, moving into operation again. The

procession resumed, metal spheres moving through the gray ash with

their loads. He could hear their treads scrabbling against the ground.

He shuddered.



Scott watched intently as he brought the shiny tube out of his pocket.

"He had that?"



"In his hand." Leone unscrewed the top. "Maybe you should look at it,

sir."



Scott took it. He emptied the contents out in the palm of his hand. A

small piece of silk paper, carefully folded. He sat down by the light

and unfolded it.



"What's it say, sir?" Eric said. Several officers came up the tunnel.

Major Hendricks appeared.



"Major," Scott said. "Look at this."



Hendricks read the slip. "This just come?"



"A single runner. Just now."



"Where is he?" Hendricks asked sharply.



"The claws got him."



Major Hendricks grunted. "Here." He passed it to his companions. "I

think this is what we've been waiting for. They certainly took their

time about it."



"So they want to talk terms," Scott said. "Are we going along with

them?"



"That's not for us to decide." Hendricks sat down. "Where's the

communications officer? I want the Moon Base."



Leone pondered as the communications officer raised the outside

antenna cautiously, scanning the sky above the bunker for any sign of

a watching Russian ship.



"Sir," Scott said to Hendricks. "It's sure strange they suddenly came

around. We've been using the claws for almost a year. Now all of a

sudden they start to fold."



"Maybe claws have been getting down in their bunkers."



"One of the big ones, the kind with stalks, got into an Ivan bunker

last week," Eric said. "It got a whole platoon of them before they got

their lid shut."



"How do you know?"



"A buddy told me. The thing came back with--with remains."



"Moon Base, sir," the communications officer said.



On the screen the face of the lunar monitor appeared. His crisp

uniform contrasted to the uniforms in the bunker. And he was clean

shaven. "Moon Base."



"This is forward command L-Whistle. On Terra. Let me have General

Thompson."



The monitor faded. Presently General Thompson's heavy features came

into focus. "What is it, Major?"



"Our claws got a single Russian runner with a message. We don't know

whether to act on it--there have been tricks like this in the past."



"What's the message?"



"The Russians want us to send a single officer on policy level over to

their lines. For a conference. They don't state the nature of the

conference. They say that matters of--" He consulted the slip.

"--Matters of grave urgency make it advisable that discussion be

opened between a representative of the UN forces and themselves."



He held the message up to the screen for the general to scan.

Thompson's eyes moved.



"What should we do?" Hendricks said.



"Send a man out."



"You don't think it's a trap?"



"It might be. But the location they give for their forward command is

correct. It's worth a try, at any rate."



"I'll send an officer out. And report the results to you as soon as he

returns."



"All right, Major." Thompson broke the connection. The screen died. Up

above, the antenna came slowly down.



Hendricks rolled up the paper, deep in thought.



"I'll go," Leone said.



"They want somebody at policy level." Hendricks rubbed his jaw.

"Policy level. I haven't been outside in months. Maybe I could use a

little air."



"Don't you think it's risky?"



Hendricks lifted the view sight and gazed into it. The remains of the

Russian were gone. Only a single claw was in sight. It was folding

itself back, disappearing into the ash, like a crab. Like some hideous

metal crab....



"That's the only thing that bothers me." Hendricks rubbed his wrist.

"I know I'm safe as long as I have this on me. But there's something

about them. I hate the damn things. I wish we'd never invented them.

There's something wrong with them. Relentless little--"



"If we hadn't invented them, the Ivans would have."



Hendricks pushed the sight back. "Anyhow, it seems to be winning the

war. I guess that's good."



"Sounds like you're getting the same jitters as the Ivans." Hendricks

examined his wrist watch. "I guess I had better get started, if I want

to be there before dark."



       *       *       *       *       *



He took a deep breath and then stepped out onto the gray, rubbled

ground. After a minute he lit a cigarette and stood gazing around him.

The landscape was dead. Nothing stirred. He could see for miles,

endless ash and slag, ruins of buildings. A few trees without leaves

or branches, only the trunks. Above him the eternal rolling clouds of

gray, drifting between Terra and the sun.



Major Hendricks went on. Off to the right something scuttled,

something round and metallic. A claw, going lickety-split after

something. Probably after a small animal, a rat. They got rats, too.

As a sort of sideline.



He came to the top of the little hill and lifted his fieldglasses. The

Russian lines were a few miles ahead of him. They had a forward

command post there. The runner had come from it.



A squat robot with undulating arms passed by him, its arms weaving

inquiringly. The robot went on its way, disappearing under some

debris. Hendricks watched it go. He had never seen that type before.

There were getting to be more and more types he had never seen, new

varieties and sizes coming up from the underground factories.



Hendricks put out his cigarette and hurried on. It was interesting,

the use of artificial forms in warfare. How had they got started?

Necessity. The Soviet Union had gained great initial success, usual

with the side that got the war going. Most of North America had been

blasted off the map. Retaliation was quick in coming, of course. The

sky was full of circling disc-bombers long before the war began; they

had been up there for years. The discs began sailing down all over

Russia within hours after Washington got it.



       *       *       *       *       *



But that hadn't helped Washington.



The American bloc governments moved to the Moon Base the first year.

There was not much else to do. Europe was gone; a slag heap with dark

weeds growing from the ashes and bones. Most of North America was

useless; nothing could be planted, no one could live. A few million

people kept going up in Canada and down in South America. But during

the second year Soviet parachutists began to drop, a few at first,

then more and more. They wore the first really effective

anti-radiation equipment; what was left of American production moved

to the moon along with the governments.



All but the troops. The remaining troops stayed behind as best they

could, a few thousand here, a platoon there. No one knew exactly where

they were; they stayed where they could, moving around at night,

hiding in ruins, in sewers, cellars, with the rats and snakes. It

looked as if the Soviet Union had the war almost won. Except for a

handful of projectiles fired off from the moon daily, there was almost

no weapon in use against them. They came and went as they pleased. The

war, for all practical purposes, was over. Nothing effective opposed

them.



       *       *       *       *       *



And then the first claws appeared. And overnight the complexion of the

war changed.



The claws were awkward, at first. Slow. The Ivans knocked them off

almost as fast as they crawled out of their underground tunnels. But

then they got better, faster and more cunning. Factories, all on

Terra, turned them out. Factories a long way under ground, behind the

Soviet lines, factories that had once made atomic projectiles, now

almost forgotten.



The claws got faster, and they got bigger. New types appeared, some

with feelers, some that flew. There were a few jumping kinds.



The best technicians on the moon were working on designs, making them

more and more intricate, more flexible. They became uncanny; the Ivans

were having a lot of trouble with them. Some of the little claws were

learning to hide themselves, burrowing down into the ash, lying in

wait.



And then they started getting into the Russian bunkers, slipping down

when the lids were raised for air and a look around. One claw inside a

bunker, a churning sphere of blades and metal--that was enough. And

when one got in others followed. With a weapon like that the war

couldn't go on much longer.



Maybe it was already over.



Maybe he was going to hear the news. Maybe the Politburo had decided

to throw in the sponge. Too bad it had taken so long. Six years. A

long time for war like that, the way they had waged it. The automatic

retaliation discs, spinning down all over Russia, hundreds of

thousands of them. Bacteria crystals. The Soviet guided missiles,

whistling through the air. The chain bombs. And now this, the robots,

the claws--



The claws weren't like other weapons. They were _alive_, from any

practical standpoint, whether the Governments wanted to admit it or

not. They were not machines. They were living things, spinning,

creeping, shaking themselves up suddenly from the gray ash and darting

toward a man, climbing up him, rushing for his throat. And that was

what they had been designed to do. Their job.



They did their job well. Especially lately, with the new designs

coming up. Now they repaired themselves. They were on their own.

Radiation tabs protected the UN troops, but if a man lost his tab he

was fair game for the claws, no matter what his uniform. Down below

the surface automatic machinery stamped them out. Human beings stayed

a long way off. It was too risky; nobody wanted to be around them.

They were left to themselves. And they seemed to be doing all right.

The new designs were faster, more complex. More efficient.



Apparently they had won the war.



       *       *       *       *       *



Major Hendricks lit a second cigarette. The landscape depressed him.

Nothing but ash and ruins. He seemed to be alone, the only living

thing in the whole world. To the right the ruins of a town rose up, a

few walls and heaps of debris. He tossed the dead match away,

increasing his pace. Suddenly he stopped, jerking up his gun, his body

tense. For a minute it looked like--



From behind the shell of a ruined building a figure came, walking

slowly toward him, walking hesitantly.



Hendricks blinked. "Stop!"



The boy stopped. Hendricks lowered his gun. The boy stood silently,

looking at him. He was small, not very old. Perhaps eight. But it was

hard to tell. Most of the kids who remained were stunted. He wore a

faded blue sweater, ragged with dirt, and short pants. His hair was

long and matted. Brown hair. It hung over his face and around his

ears. He held something in his arms.



"What's that you have?" Hendricks said sharply.



The boy held it out. It was a toy, a bear. A teddy bear. The boy's

eyes were large, but without expression.



Hendricks relaxed. "I don't want it. Keep it."



The boy hugged the bear again.



"Where do you live?" Hendricks said.



"In there."



"The ruins?"



"Yes."



"Underground?"



"Yes."



"How many are there?"



"How--how many?"



"How many of you. How big's your settlement?"



The boy did not answer.



Hendricks frowned. "You're not all by yourself, are you?"



The boy nodded.



"How do you stay alive?"



"There's food."



"What kind of food?"



"Different."



Hendricks studied him. "How old are you?"



"Thirteen."



       *       *       *       *       *



It wasn't possible. Or was it? The boy was thin, stunted. And probably

sterile. Radiation exposure, years straight. No wonder he was so

small. His arms and legs were like pipecleaners, knobby, and thin.

Hendricks touched the boy's arm. His skin was dry and rough; radiation

skin. He bent down, looking into the boy's face. There was no

expression. Big eyes, big and dark.



"Are you blind?" Hendricks said.



"No. I can see some."



"How do you get away from the claws?"



"The claws?"



"The round things. That run and burrow."



"I don't understand."



Maybe there weren't any claws around. A lot of areas were free. They

collected mostly around bunkers, where there were people. The claws

had been designed to sense warmth, warmth of living things.



"You're lucky." Hendricks straightened up. "Well? Which way are you

going? Back--back there?"



"Can I come with you?"



"With _me_?" Hendricks folded his arms. "I'm going a long way. Miles.

I have to hurry." He looked at his watch. "I have to get there by

nightfall."



"I want to come."



Hendricks fumbled in his pack. "It isn't worth it. Here." He tossed

down the food cans he had with him. "You take these and go back.

Okay?"



The boy said nothing.



"I'll be coming back this way. In a day or so. If you're around here

when I come back you can come along with me. All right?"



"I want to go with you now."



"It's a long walk."



"I can walk."



Hendricks shifted uneasily. It made too good a target, two people

walking along. And the boy would slow him down. But he might not come

back this way. And if the boy were really all alone--



"Okay. Come along."



       *       *       *       *       *



The boy fell in beside him. Hendricks strode along. The boy walked

silently, clutching his teddy bear.



"What's your name?" Hendricks said, after a time.



"David Edward Derring."



"David? What--what happened to your mother and father?"



"They died."



"How?"



"In the blast."



"How long ago?"



"Six years."



Hendricks slowed down. "You've been alone six years?"



"No. There were other people for awhile. They went away."



"And you've been alone since?"



"Yes."



Hendricks glanced down. The boy was strange, saying very little.

Withdrawn. But that was the way they were, the children who had

survived. Quiet. Stoic. A strange kind of fatalism gripped them.

Nothing came as a surprise. They accepted anything that came along.

There was no longer any _normal_, any natural course of things, moral

or physical, for them to expect. Custom, habit, all the determining

forces of learning were gone; only brute experience remained.



"Am I walking too fast?" Hendricks said.



"No."



"How did you happen to see me?"



"I was waiting."



"Waiting?" Hendricks was puzzled. "What were you waiting for?"



"To catch things."



"What kind of things?"



"Things to eat."



"Oh." Hendricks set his lips grimly. A thirteen year old boy, living

on rats and gophers and half-rotten canned food. Down in a hole under

the ruins of a town. With radiation pools and claws, and Russian

dive-mines up above, coasting around in the sky.



"Where are we going?" David asked.



"To the Russian lines."



"Russian?"



"The enemy. The people who started the war. They dropped the first

radiation bombs. They began all this."



The boy nodded. His face showed no expression.



"I'm an American," Hendricks said.



There was no comment. On they went, the two of them, Hendricks walking

a little ahead, David trailing behind him, hugging his dirty teddy

bear against his chest.



       *       *       *       *       *



About four in the afternoon they stopped to eat. Hendricks built a

fire in a hollow between some slabs of concrete. He cleared the weeds

away and heaped up bits of wood. The Russians' lines were not very far

ahead. Around him was what had once been a long valley, acres of fruit

trees and grapes. Nothing remained now but a few bleak stumps and the

mountains that stretched across the horizon at the far end. And the

clouds of rolling ash that blew and drifted with the wind, settling

over the weeds and remains of buildings, walls here and there, once in

awhile what had been a road.



Hendricks made coffee and heated up some boiled mutton and bread.

"Here." He handed bread and mutton to David. David squatted by the

edge of the fire, his knees knobby and white. He examined the food and

then passed it back, shaking his head.



"No."



"No? Don't you want any?"



"No."



Hendricks shrugged. Maybe the boy was a mutant, used to special food.

It didn't matter. When he was hungry he would find something to eat.

The boy was strange. But there were many strange changes coming over

the world. Life was not the same, anymore. It would never be the same

again. The human race was going to have to realize that.



"Suit yourself," Hendricks said. He ate the bread and mutton by

himself, washing it down with coffee. He ate slowly, finding the food

hard to digest. When he was done he got to his feet and stamped the

fire out.



David rose slowly, watching him with his young-old eyes.



"We're going," Hendricks said.



"All right."



Hendricks walked along, his gun in his arms. They were close; he was

tense, ready for anything. The Russians should be expecting a runner,

an answer to their own runner, but they were tricky. There was always

the possibility of a slipup. He scanned the landscape around him.

Nothing but slag and ash, a few hills, charred trees. Concrete walls.

But someplace ahead was the first bunker of the Russian lines, the

forward command. Underground, buried deep, with only a periscope

showing, a few gun muzzles. Maybe an antenna.



"Will we be there soon?" David asked.



"Yes. Getting tired?"



"No."



"Why, then?"



David did not answer. He plodded carefully along behind, picking his

way over the ash. His legs and shoes were gray with dust. His pinched

face was streaked, lines of gray ash in riverlets down the pale white

of his skin. There was no color to his face. Typical of the new

children, growing up in cellars and sewers and underground shelters.



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks slowed down. He lifted his fieldglasses and studied the

ground ahead of him. Were they there, someplace, waiting for him?

Watching him, the way his men had watched the Russian runner? A chill

went up his back. Maybe they were getting their guns ready, preparing

to fire, the way his men had prepared, made ready to kill.



Hendricks stopped, wiping perspiration from his face. "Damn." It made

him uneasy. But he should be expected. The situation was different.



He strode over the ash, holding his gun tightly with both hands.

Behind him came David. Hendricks peered around, tight-lipped. Any

second it might happen. A burst of white light, a blast, carefully

aimed from inside a deep concrete bunker.



He raised his arm and waved it around in a circle.



Nothing moved. To the right a long ridge ran, topped with dead tree

trunks. A few wild vines had grown up around the trees, remains of

arbors. And the eternal dark weeds. Hendricks studied the ridge. Was

anything up there? Perfect place for a lookout. He approached the

ridge warily, David coming silently behind. If it were his command

he'd have a sentry up there, watching for troops trying to infiltrate

into the command area. Of course, if it were his command there would

be the claws around the area for full protection.



He stopped, feet apart, hands on his hips.



"Are we there?" David said.



"Almost."



"Why have we stopped?"



"I don't want to take any chances." Hendricks advanced slowly. Now the

ridge lay directly beside him, along his right. Overlooking him. His

uneasy feeling increased. If an Ivan were up there he wouldn't have a

chance. He waved his arm again. They should be expecting someone in

the UN uniform, in response to the note capsule. Unless the whole

thing was a trap.



"Keep up with me." He turned toward David. "Don't drop behind."



"With you?"



"Up beside me! We're close. We can't take any chances. Come on."



"I'll be all right." David remained behind him, in the rear, a few

paces away, still clutching his teddy bear.



"Have it your way." Hendricks raised his glasses again, suddenly

tense. For a moment--had something moved? He scanned the ridge

carefully. Everything was silent. Dead. No life up there, only tree

trunks and ash. Maybe a few rats. The big black rats that had survived

the claws. Mutants--built their own shelters out of saliva and ash.

Some kind of plaster. Adaptation. He started forward again.



       *       *       *       *       *



A tall figure came out on the ridge above him, cloak flapping.

Gray-green. A Russian. Behind him a second soldier appeared, another

Russian. Both lifted their guns, aiming.



Hendricks froze. He opened his mouth. The soldiers were kneeling,

sighting down the side of the slope. A third figure had joined them on

the ridge top, a smaller figure in gray-green. A woman. She stood

behind the other two.



Hendricks found his voice. "Stop!" He waved up at them frantically.

"I'm--"



The two Russians fired. Behind Hendricks there was a faint _pop_.

Waves of heat lapped against him, throwing him to the ground. Ash tore

at his face, grinding into his eyes and nose. Choking, he pulled

himself to his knees. It was all a trap. He was finished. He had come

to be killed, like a steer. The soldiers and the woman were coming

down the side of the ridge toward him, sliding down through the soft

ash. Hendricks was numb. His head throbbed. Awkwardly, he got his

rifle up and took aim. It weighed a thousand tons; he could hardly

hold it. His nose and cheeks stung. The air was full of the blast

smell, a bitter acrid stench.



"Don't fire," the first Russian said, in heavily accented English.



The three of them came up to him, surrounding him. "Put down your

rifle, Yank," the other said.



Hendricks was dazed. Everything had happened so fast. He had been

caught. And they had blasted the boy. He turned his head. David was

gone. What remained of him was strewn across the ground.



The three Russians studied him curiously. Hendricks sat, wiping blood

from his nose, picking out bits of ash. He shook his head, trying to

clear it. "Why did you do it?" he murmured thickly. "The boy."



"Why?" One of the soldiers helped him roughly to his feet. He turned

Hendricks around. "Look."



Hendricks closed his eyes.



"Look!" The two Russians pulled him forward. "See. Hurry up. There

isn't much time to spare, Yank!"



Hendricks looked. And gasped.



"See now? Now do you understand?"



       *       *       *       *       *



From the remains of David a metal wheel rolled. Relays, glinting

metal. Parts, wiring. One of the Russians kicked at the heap of

remains. Parts popped out, rolling away, wheels and springs and rods.

A plastic section fell in, half charred. Hendricks bent shakily down.

The front of the head had come off. He could make out the intricate

brain, wires and relays, tiny tubes and switches, thousands of minute

studs--



"A robot," the soldier holding his arm said. "We watched it tagging

you."



"Tagging me?"



"That's their way. They tag along with you. Into the bunker. That's

how they get in."



Hendricks blinked, dazed. "But--"



"Come on." They led him toward the ridge. "We can't stay here. It

isn't safe. There must be hundreds of them all around here."



The three of them pulled him up the side of the ridge, sliding and

slipping on the ash. The woman reached the top and stood waiting for

them.



"The forward command," Hendricks muttered. "I came to negotiate with

the Soviet--"



"There is no more forward command. _They_ got in. We'll explain." They

reached the top of the ridge. "We're all that's left. The three of us.

The rest were down in the bunker."



"This way. Down this way." The woman unscrewed a lid, a gray manhole

cover set in the ground. "Get in."



Hendricks lowered himself. The two soldiers and the woman came behind

him, following him down the ladder. The woman closed the lid after

them, bolting it tightly into place.



"Good thing we saw you," one of the two soldiers grunted. "It had

tagged you about as far as it was going to."



       *       *       *       *       *



"Give me one of your cigarettes," the woman said. "I haven't had an

American cigarette for weeks."



Hendricks pushed the pack to her. She took a cigarette and passed the

pack to the two soldiers. In the corner of the small room the lamp

gleamed fitfully. The room was low-ceilinged, cramped. The four of

them sat around a small wood table. A few dirty dishes were stacked to

one side. Behind a ragged curtain a second room was partly visible.

Hendricks saw the corner of a cot, some blankets, clothes hung on a

hook.



"We were here," the soldier beside him said. He took off his helmet,

pushing his blond hair back. "I'm Corporal Rudi Maxer. Polish.

Impressed in the Soviet Army two years ago." He held out his hand.



Hendricks hesitated and then shook. "Major Joseph Hendricks."



"Klaus Epstein." The other soldier shook with him, a small dark man

with thinning hair. Epstein plucked nervously at his ear. "Austrian.

Impressed God knows when. I don't remember. The three of us were here,

Rudi and I, with Tasso." He indicated the woman. "That's how we

escaped. All the rest were down in the bunker."



"And--and _they_ got in?"



Epstein lit a cigarette. "First just one of them. The kind that tagged

you. Then it let others in."



Hendricks became alert. "The _kind_? Are there more than one kind?"



"The little boy. David. David holding his teddy bear. That's Variety

Three. The most effective."



"What are the other types?"



Epstein reached into his coat. "Here." He tossed a packet of

photographs onto the table, tied with a string. "Look for yourself."



Hendricks untied the string.



"You see," Rudi Maxer said, "that was why we wanted to talk terms. The

Russians, I mean. We found out about a week ago. Found out that your

claws were beginning to make up new designs on their own. New types of

their own. Better types. Down in your underground factories behind our

lines. You let them stamp themselves, repair themselves. Made them

more and more intricate. It's your fault this happened."



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks examined the photos. They had been snapped hurriedly; they

were blurred and indistinct. The first few showed--David. David

walking along a road, by himself. David and another David. Three

Davids. All exactly alike. Each with a ragged teddy bear.



All pathetic.



"Look at the others," Tasso said.



The next pictures, taken at a great distance, showed a towering

wounded soldier sitting by the side of a path, his arm in a sling, the

stump of one leg extended, a crude crutch on his lap. Then two wounded

soldiers, both the same, standing side by side.



"That's Variety One. The Wounded Soldier." Klaus reached out and took

the pictures. "You see, the claws were designed to get to human

beings. To find them. Each kind was better than the last. They got

farther, closer, past most of our defenses, into our lines. But as

long as they were merely _machines_, metal spheres with claws and

horns, feelers, they could be picked off like any other object. They

could be detected as lethal robots as soon as they were seen. Once we

caught sight of them--"



"Variety One subverted our whole north wing," Rudi said. "It was a

long time before anyone caught on. Then it was too late. They came in,

wounded soldiers, knocking and begging to be let in. So we let them

in. And as soon as they were in they took over. We were watching out

for machines...."



"At that time it was thought there was only the one type," Klaus

Epstein said. "No one suspected there were other types. The pictures

were flashed to us. When the runner was sent to you, we knew of just

one type. Variety One. The big Wounded Soldier. We thought that was

all."



"Your line fell to--"



"To Variety Three. David and his bear. That worked even better." Klaus

smiled bitterly. "Soldiers are suckers for children. We brought them

in and tried to feed them. We found out the hard way what they were

after. At least, those who were in the bunker."



"The three of us were lucky," Rudi said. "Klaus and I were--were

visiting Tasso when it happened. This is her place." He waved a big

hand around. "This little cellar. We finished and climbed the ladder

to start back. From the ridge we saw. There they were, all around the

bunker. Fighting was still going on. David and his bear. Hundreds of

them. Klaus took the pictures."



Klaus tied up the photographs again.



       *       *       *       *       *



"And it's going on all along your line?" Hendricks said.



"Yes."



"How about _our_ lines?" Without thinking, he touched the tab on his

arm. "Can they--"



"They're not bothered by your radiation tabs. It makes no difference

to them, Russian, American, Pole, German. It's all the same. They're

doing what they were designed to do. Carrying out the original idea.

They track down life, wherever they find it."



"They go by warmth," Klaus said. "That was the way you constructed

them from the very start. Of course, those you designed were kept back

by the radiation tabs you wear. Now they've got around that. These new

varieties are lead-lined."



"What's the other variety?" Hendricks asked. "The David type, the

Wounded Soldier--what's the other?"



"We don't know." Klaus pointed up at the wall. On the wall were two

metal plates, ragged at the edges. Hendricks got up and studied them.

They were bent and dented.



"The one on the left came off a Wounded Soldier," Rudi said. "We got

one of them. It was going along toward our old bunker. We got it from

the ridge, the same way we got the David tagging you."



The plate was stamped: I-V. Hendricks touched the other plate. "And

this came from the David type?"



"Yes." The plate was stamped: III-V.



Klaus took a look at them, leaning over Hendricks' broad shoulder.

"You can see what we're up against. There's another type. Maybe it was

abandoned. Maybe it didn't work. But there must be a Second Variety.

There's One and Three."



"You were lucky," Rudi said. "The David tagged you all the way here

and never touched you. Probably thought you'd get it into a bunker,

somewhere."



"One gets in and it's all over," Klaus said. "They move fast. One lets

all the rest inside. They're inflexible. Machines with one purpose.

They were built for only one thing." He rubbed sweat from his lip. "We

saw."



They were silent.



"Let me have another cigarette, Yank," Tasso said. "They are good. I

almost forgot how they were."



       *       *       *       *       *



It was night. The sky was black. No stars were visible through the

rolling clouds of ash. Klaus lifted the lid cautiously so that

Hendricks could look out.



Rudi pointed into the darkness. "Over that way are the bunkers. Where

we used to be. Not over half a mile from us. It was just chance Klaus

and I were not there when it happened. Weakness. Saved by our lusts."



"All the rest must be dead," Klaus said in a low voice. "It came

quickly. This morning the Politburo reached their decision. They

notified us--forward command. Our runner was sent out at once. We saw

him start toward the direction of your lines. We covered him until he

was out of sight."



"Alex Radrivsky. We both knew him. He disappeared about six o'clock.

The sun had just come up. About noon Klaus and I had an hour relief.

We crept off, away from the bunkers. No one was watching. We came

here. There used to be a town here, a few houses, a street. This

cellar was part of a big farmhouse. We knew Tasso would be here,

hiding down in her little place. We had come here before. Others from

the bunkers came here. Today happened to be our turn."



"So we were saved," Klaus said. "Chance. It might have been others.

We--we finished, and then we came up to the surface and started back

along the ridge. That was when we saw them, the Davids. We understood

right away. We had seen the photos of the First Variety, the Wounded

Soldier. Our Commissar distributed them to us with an explanation. If

we had gone another step they would have seen us. As it was we had to

blast two Davids before we got back. There were hundreds of them, all

around. Like ants. We took pictures and slipped back here, bolting the

lid tight."



"They're not so much when you catch them alone. We moved faster than

they did. But they're inexorable. Not like living things. They came

right at us. And we blasted them."



Major Hendricks rested against the edge of the lid, adjusting his eyes

to the darkness. "Is it safe to have the lid up at all?"



"If we're careful. How else can you operate your transmitter?"



Hendricks lifted the small belt transmitter slowly. He pressed it

against his ear. The metal was cold and damp. He blew against the

mike, raising up the short antenna. A faint hum sounded in his ear.

"That's true, I suppose."



But he still hesitated.



"We'll pull you under if anything happens," Klaus said.



"Thanks." Hendricks waited a moment, resting the transmitter against

his shoulder. "Interesting, isn't it?"



"What?"



"This, the new types. The new varieties of claws. We're completely at

their mercy, aren't we? By now they've probably gotten into the UN

lines, too. It makes me wonder if we're not seeing the beginning of a

new species. _The_ new species. Evolution. The race to come after

man."



       *       *       *       *       *



Rudi grunted. "There is no race after man."



"No? Why not? Maybe we're seeing it now, the end of human beings, the

beginning of the new society."



"They're not a race. They're mechanical killers. You made them to

destroy. That's all they can do. They're machines with a job."



"So it seems now. But how about later on? After the war is over.

Maybe, when there aren't any humans to destroy, their real

potentialities will begin to show."



"You talk as if they were alive!"



"Aren't they?"



There was silence. "They're machines," Rudi said. "They look like

people, but they're machines."



"Use your transmitter, Major," Klaus said. "We can't stay up here

forever."



Holding the transmitter tightly Hendricks called the code of the

command bunker. He waited, listening. No response. Only silence. He

checked the leads carefully. Everything was in place.



"Scott!" he said into the mike. "Can you hear me?"



Silence. He raised the gain up full and tried again. Only static.



"I don't get anything. They may hear me but they may not want to

answer."



"Tell them it's an emergency."



"They'll think I'm being forced to call. Under your direction." He

tried again, outlining briefly what he had learned. But still the

phone was silent, except for the faint static.



"Radiation pools kill most transmission," Klaus said, after awhile.

"Maybe that's it."



Hendricks shut the transmitter up. "No use. No answer. Radiation

pools? Maybe. Or they hear me, but won't answer. Frankly, that's what

I would do, if a runner tried to call from the Soviet lines. They have

no reason to believe such a story. They may hear everything I say--"



"Or maybe it's too late."



Hendricks nodded.



"We better get the lid down," Rudi said nervously. "We don't want to

take unnecessary chances."



       *       *       *       *       *



They climbed slowly back down the tunnel. Klaus bolted the lid

carefully into place. They descended into the kitchen. The air was

heavy and close around them.



"Could they work that fast?" Hendricks said. "I left the bunker this

noon. Ten hours ago. How could they move so quickly?"



"It doesn't take them long. Not after the first one gets in. It goes

wild. You know what the little claws can do. Even _one_ of these is

beyond belief. Razors, each finger. Maniacal."



"All right." Hendricks moved away impatiently. He stood with his back

to them.



"What's the matter?" Rudi said.



"The Moon Base. God, if they've gotten there--"



"The Moon Base?"



Hendricks turned around. "They couldn't have got to the Moon Base. How

would they get there? It isn't possible. I can't believe it."



"What is this Moon Base? We've heard rumors, but nothing definite.

What is the actual situation? You seem concerned."



"We're supplied from the moon. The governments are there, under the

lunar surface. All our people and industries. That's what keeps us

going. If they should find some way of getting off Terra, onto the

moon--"



"It only takes one of them. Once the first one gets in it admits the

others. Hundreds of them, all alike. You should have seen them.

Identical. Like ants."



"Perfect socialism," Tasso said. "The ideal of the communist state.

All citizens interchangeable."



Klaus grunted angrily. "That's enough. Well? What next?"



Hendricks paced back and forth, around the small room. The air was

full of smells of food and perspiration. The others watched him.

Presently Tasso pushed through the curtain, into the other room. "I'm

going to take a nap."



The curtain closed behind her. Rudi and Klaus sat down at the table,

still watching Hendricks.



"It's up to you," Klaus said. "We don't know your situation."



Hendricks nodded.



"It's a problem." Rudi drank some coffee, filling his cup from a rusty

pot. "We're safe here for awhile, but we can't stay here forever. Not

enough food or supplies."



"But if we go outside--"



"If we go outside they'll get us. Or probably they'll get us. We

couldn't go very far. How far is your command bunker, Major?"



"Three or four miles."



"We might make it. The four of us. Four of us could watch all sides.

They couldn't slip up behind us and start tagging us. We have three

rifles, three blast rifles. Tasso can have my pistol." Rudi tapped his

belt. "In the Soviet army we didn't have shoes always, but we had

guns. With all four of us armed one of us might get to your command

bunker. Preferably you, Major."



"What if they're already there?" Klaus said.



Rudi shrugged. "Well, then we come back here."



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks stopped pacing. "What do you think the chances are they're

already in the American lines?"



"Hard to say. Fairly good. They're organized. They know exactly what

they're doing. Once they start they go like a horde of locusts. They

have to keep moving, and fast. It's secrecy and speed they depend on.

Surprise. They push their way in before anyone has any idea."



"I see," Hendricks murmured.



From the other room Tasso stirred. "Major?"



Hendricks pushed the curtain back. "What?"



[Illustration]



Tasso looked up at him lazily from the cot. "Have you any more

American cigarettes left?"



Hendricks went into the room and sat down across from her, on a wood

stool. He felt in his pockets. "No. All gone."



"Too bad."



"What nationality are you?" Hendricks asked after awhile.



"Russian."



"How did you get here?"



"Here?"



"This used to be France. This was part of Normandy. Did you come with

the Soviet army?"



"Why?"



"Just curious." He studied her. She had taken off her coat, tossing it

over the end of the cot. She was young, about twenty. Slim. Her long

hair stretched out over the pillow. She was staring at him silently,

her eyes dark and large.



"What's on your mind?" Tasso said.



"Nothing. How old are you?"



"Eighteen." She continued to watch him, unblinking, her arms behind

her head. She had on Russian army pants and shirt. Gray-green. Thick

leather belt with counter and cartridges. Medicine kit.



"You're in the Soviet army?"



"No."



"Where did you get the uniform?"



She shrugged. "It was given to me," she told him.



"How--how old were you when you came here?"



"Sixteen."



"That young?"



Her eyes narrowed. "What do you mean?"



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks rubbed his jaw. "Your life would have been a lot different

if there had been no war. Sixteen. You came here at sixteen. To live

this way."



"I had to survive."



"I'm not moralizing."



"Your life would have been different, too," Tasso murmured. She

reached down and unfastened one of her boots. She kicked the boot off,

onto the floor. "Major, do you want to go in the other room? I'm

sleepy."



"It's going to be a problem, the four of us here. It's going to be

hard to live in these quarters. Are there just the two rooms?"



"Yes."



"How big was the cellar originally? Was it larger than this? Are there

other rooms filled up with debris? We might be able to open one of

them."



"Perhaps. I really don't know." Tasso loosened her belt. She made

herself comfortable on the cot, unbuttoning her shirt. "You're sure

you have no more cigarettes?"



"I had only the one pack."



"Too bad. Maybe if we get back to your bunker we can find some." The

other boot fell. Tasso reached up for the light cord. "Good night."



"You're going to sleep?"



"That's right."



The room plunged into darkness. Hendricks got up and made his way past

the curtain, into the kitchen.



And stopped, rigid.



Rudi stood against the wall, his face white and gleaming. His mouth

opened and closed but no sounds came. Klaus stood in front of him, the

muzzle of his pistol in Rudi's stomach. Neither of them moved. Klaus,

his hand tight around his gun, his features set. Rudi, pale and

silent, spread-eagled against the wall.



"What--" Hendricks muttered, but Klaus cut him off.



"Be quiet, Major. Come over here. Your gun. Get out your gun."



Hendricks drew his pistol. "What is it?"



"Cover him." Klaus motioned him forward. "Beside me. Hurry!"



Rudi moved a little, lowering his arms. He turned to Hendricks,

licking his lips. The whites of his eyes shone wildly. Sweat dripped

from his forehead, down his cheeks. He fixed his gaze on Hendricks.

"Major, he's gone insane. Stop him." Rudi's voice was thin and hoarse,

almost inaudible.



"What's going on?" Hendricks demanded.



Without lowering his pistol Klaus answered. "Major, remember our

discussion? The Three Varieties? We knew about One and Three. But we

didn't know about Two. At least, we didn't know before." Klaus'

fingers tightened around the gun butt. "We didn't know before, but we

know now."



He pressed the trigger. A burst of white heat rolled out of the gun,

licking around Rudi.



"Major, this is the Second Variety."



       *       *       *       *       *



Tasso swept the curtain aside. "Klaus! What did you do?"



Klaus turned from the charred form, gradually sinking down the wall

onto the floor. "The Second Variety, Tasso. Now we know. We have all

three types identified. The danger is less. I--"



Tasso stared past him at the remains of Rudi, at the blackened,

smouldering fragments and bits of cloth. "You killed him."



"Him? _It_, you mean. I was watching. I had a feeling, but I wasn't

sure. At least, I wasn't sure before. But this evening I was certain."

Klaus rubbed his pistol butt nervously. "We're lucky. Don't you

understand? Another hour and it might--"



"You were _certain_?" Tasso pushed past him and bent down, over the

steaming remains on the floor. Her face became hard. "Major, see for

yourself. Bones. Flesh."



Hendricks bent down beside her. The remains were human remains. Seared

flesh, charred bone fragments, part of a skull. Ligaments, viscera,

blood. Blood forming a pool against the wall.



"No wheels," Tasso said calmly. She straightened up. "No wheels, no

parts, no relays. Not a claw. Not the Second Variety." She folded her

arms. "You're going to have to be able to explain this."



Klaus sat down at the table, all the color drained suddenly from his

face. He put his head in his hands and rocked back and forth.



"Snap out of it." Tasso's fingers closed over his shoulder. "Why did

you do it? Why did you kill him?"



"He was frightened," Hendricks said. "All this, the whole thing,

building up around us."



"Maybe."



"What, then? What do you think?"



"I think he may have had a reason for killing Rudi. A good reason."



"What reason?"



"Maybe Rudi learned something."



Hendricks studied her bleak face. "About what?" he asked.



"About him. About Klaus."



       *       *       *       *       *



Klaus looked up quickly. "You can see what she's trying to say. She

thinks I'm the Second Variety. Don't you see, Major? Now she wants you

to believe I killed him on purpose. That I'm--"



"Why did you kill him, then?" Tasso said.



"I told you." Klaus shook his head wearily. "I thought he was a claw.

I thought I knew."



"Why?"



"I had been watching him. I was suspicious."



"Why?"



"I thought I had seen something. Heard something. I thought I--" He

stopped.



"Go on."



"We were sitting at the table. Playing cards. You two were in the

other room. It was silent. I thought I heard him--_whirr_."



There was silence.



"Do you believe that?" Tasso said to Hendricks.



"Yes. I believe what he says."



"I don't. I think he killed Rudi for a good purpose." Tasso touched

the rifle, resting in the corner of the room. "Major--"



"No." Hendricks shook his head. "Let's stop it right now. One is

enough. We're afraid, the way he was. If we kill him we'll be doing

what he did to Rudi."



Klaus looked gratefully up at him. "Thanks. I was afraid. You

understand, don't you? Now she's afraid, the way I was. She wants to

kill me."



"No more killing." Hendricks moved toward the end of the ladder. "I'm

going above and try the transmitter once more. If I can't get them

we're moving back toward my lines tomorrow morning."



Klaus rose quickly. "I'll come up with you and give you a hand."



       *       *       *       *       *



The night air was cold. The earth was cooling off. Klaus took a deep

breath, filling his lungs. He and Hendricks stepped onto the ground,

out of the tunnel. Klaus planted his feet wide apart, the rifle up,

watching and listening. Hendricks crouched by the tunnel mouth, tuning

the small transmitter.



"Any luck?" Klaus asked presently.



"Not yet."



"Keep trying. Tell them what happened."



Hendricks kept trying. Without success. Finally he lowered the

antenna. "It's useless. They can't hear me. Or they hear me and won't

answer. Or--"



"Or they don't exist."



"I'll try once more." Hendricks raised the antenna. "Scott, can you

hear me? Come in!"



He listened. There was only static. Then, still very faintly--



"This is Scott."



His fingers tightened. "Scott! Is it you?"



"This is Scott."



Klaus squatted down. "Is it your command?"



"Scott, listen. Do you understand? About them, the claws. Did you get

my message? Did you hear me?"



"Yes." Faintly. Almost inaudible. He could hardly make out the word.



"You got my message? Is everything all right at the bunker? None of

them have got in?"



"Everything is all right."



"Have they tried to get in?"



The voice was weaker.



"No."



Hendricks turned to Klaus. "They're all right."



"Have they been attacked?"



"No." Hendricks pressed the phone tighter to his ear. "Scott, I can

hardly hear you. Have you notified the Moon Base? Do they know? Are

they alerted?"



No answer.



"Scott! Can you hear me?"



Silence.



Hendricks relaxed, sagging. "Faded out. Must be radiation pools."



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks and Klaus looked at each other. Neither of them said

anything. After a time Klaus said, "Did it sound like any of your men?

Could you identify the voice?"



"It was too faint."



"You couldn't be certain?"



"No."



"Then it could have been--"



"I don't know. Now I'm not sure. Let's go back down and get the lid

closed."



They climbed back down the ladder slowly, into the warm cellar. Klaus

bolted the lid behind them. Tasso waited for them, her face

expressionless.



"Any luck?" she asked.



Neither of them answered. "Well?" Klaus said at last. "What do you

think, Major? Was it your officer, or was it one of _them_?"



"I don't know."



"Then we're just where we were before."



Hendricks stared down at the floor, his jaw set. "We'll have to go. To

be sure."



"Anyhow, we have food here for only a few weeks. We'd have to go up

after that, in any case."



"Apparently so."



"What's wrong?" Tasso demanded. "Did you get across to your bunker?

What's the matter?"



"It may have been one of my men," Hendricks said slowly. "Or it may

have been one of _them_. But we'll never know standing here." He

examined his watch. "Let's turn in and get some sleep. We want to be

up early tomorrow."



"Early?"



"Our best chance to get through the claws should be early in the

morning," Hendricks said.



       *       *       *       *       *



The morning was crisp and clear. Major Hendricks studied the

countryside through his fieldglasses.



"See anything?" Klaus said.



"No."



"Can you make out our bunkers?"



"Which way?"



"Here." Klaus took the glasses and adjusted them. "I know where to

look." He looked a long time, silently.



Tasso came to the top of the tunnel and stepped up onto the ground.

"Anything?"



"No." Klaus passed the glasses back to Hendricks. "They're out of

sight. Come on. Let's not stay here."



The three of them made their way down the side of the ridge, sliding

in the soft ash. Across a flat rock a lizard scuttled. They stopped

instantly, rigid.



"What was it?" Klaus muttered.



"A lizard."



The lizard ran on, hurrying through the ash. It was exactly the same

color as the ash.



"Perfect adaptation," Klaus said. "Proves we were right. Lysenko, I

mean."



They reached the bottom of the ridge and stopped, standing close

together, looking around them.



"Let's go." Hendricks started off. "It's a good long trip, on foot."



Klaus fell in beside him. Tasso walked behind, her pistol held

alertly. "Major, I've been meaning to ask you something," Klaus said.

"How did you run across the David? The one that was tagging you."



"I met it along the way. In some ruins."



"What did it say?"



"Not much. It said it was alone. By itself."



"You couldn't tell it was a machine? It talked like a living person?

You never suspected?"



"It didn't say much. I noticed nothing unusual.



"It's strange, machines so much like people that you can be fooled.

Almost alive. I wonder where it'll end."



"They're doing what you Yanks designed them to do," Tasso said. "You

designed them to hunt out life and destroy. Human life. Wherever they

find it."



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks was watching Klaus intently. "Why did you ask me? What's on

your mind?"



"Nothing," Klaus answered.



"Klaus thinks you're the Second Variety," Tasso said calmly, from

behind them. "Now he's got his eye on you."



Klaus flushed. "Why not? We sent a runner to the Yank lines and he

comes back. Maybe he thought he'd find some good game here."



Hendricks laughed harshly. "I came from the UN bunkers. There were

human beings all around me."



"Maybe you saw an opportunity to get into the Soviet lines. Maybe you

saw your chance. Maybe you--"



"The Soviet lines had already been taken over. Your lines had been

invaded before I left my command bunker. Don't forget that."



Tasso came up beside him. "That proves nothing at all, Major."



"Why not?"



"There appears to be little communication between the varieties. Each

is made in a different factory. They don't seem to work together. You

might have started for the Soviet lines without knowing anything about

the work of the other varieties. Or even what the other varieties were

like."



"How do you know so much about the claws?" Hendricks said.



"I've seen them. I've observed them. I observed them take over the

Soviet bunkers."



"You know quite a lot," Klaus said. "Actually, you saw very little.

Strange that you should have been such an acute observer."



Tasso laughed. "Do you suspect me, now?"



"Forget it," Hendricks said. They walked on in silence.



"Are we going the whole way on foot?" Tasso said, after awhile. "I'm

not used to walking." She gazed around at the plain of ash, stretching

out on all sides of them, as far as they could see. "How dreary."



"It's like this all the way," Klaus said.



"In a way I wish you had been in your bunker when the attack came."



"Somebody else would have been with you, if not me," Klaus muttered.



Tasso laughed, putting her hands in her pockets. "I suppose so."



They walked on, keeping their eyes on the vast plain of silent ash

around them.



       *       *       *       *       *



The sun was setting. Hendricks made his way forward slowly, waving

Tasso and Klaus back. Klaus squatted down, resting his gun butt

against the ground.



Tasso found a concrete slab and sat down with a sigh. "It's good to

rest."



"Be quiet," Klaus said sharply.



Hendricks pushed up to the top of the rise ahead of them. The same

rise the Russian runner had come up, the day before. Hendricks dropped

down, stretching himself out, peering through his glasses at what lay

beyond.



Nothing was visible. Only ash and occasional trees. But there, not

more than fifty yards ahead, was the entrance of the forward command

bunker. The bunker from which he had come. Hendricks watched silently.

No motion. No sign of life. Nothing stirred.



Klaus slithered up beside him. "Where is it?"



"Down there." Hendricks passed him the glasses. Clouds of ash rolled

across the evening sky. The world was darkening. They had a couple of

hours of light left, at the most. Probably not that much.



"I don't see anything," Klaus said.



"That tree there. The stump. By the pile of bricks. The entrance is to

the right of the bricks."



"I'll have to take your word for it."



"You and Tasso cover me from here. You'll be able to sight all the way

to the bunker entrance."



"You're going down alone?"



"With my wrist tab I'll be safe. The ground around the bunker is a

living field of claws. They collect down in the ash. Like crabs.

Without tabs you wouldn't have a chance."



"Maybe you're right."



"I'll walk slowly all the way. As soon as I know for certain--"



"If they're down inside the bunker you won't be able to get back up

here. They go fast. You don't realize."



"What do you suggest?"



Klaus considered. "I don't know. Get them to come up to the surface.

So you can see."



Hendricks brought his transmitter from his belt, raising the antenna.

"Let's get started."



       *       *       *       *       *



Klaus signalled to Tasso. She crawled expertly up the side of the rise

to where they were sitting.



"He's going down alone," Klaus said. "We'll cover him from here. As

soon as you see him start back, fire past him at once. They come

quick."



"You're not very optimistic," Tasso said.



"No, I'm not."



Hendricks opened the breech of his gun, checking it carefully. "Maybe

things are all right."



"You didn't see them. Hundreds of them. All the same. Pouring out like

ants."



"I should be able to find out without going down all the way."

Hendricks locked his gun, gripping it in one hand, the transmitter in

the other. "Well, wish me luck."



Klaus put out his hand. "Don't go down until you're sure. Talk to them

from up here. Make them show themselves."



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks stood up. He stepped down the side of the rise.



A moment later he was walking slowly toward the pile of bricks and

debris beside the dead tree stump. Toward the entrance of the forward

command bunker.



Nothing stirred. He raised the transmitter, clicking it on. "Scott?

Can you hear me?"



Silence.



"Scott! This is Hendricks. Can you hear me? I'm standing outside the

bunker. You should be able to see me in the view sight."



He listened, the transmitter gripped tightly. No sound. Only static.

He walked forward. A claw burrowed out of the ash and raced toward

him. It halted a few feet away and then slunk off. A second claw

appeared, one of the big ones with feelers. It moved toward him,

studied him intently, and then fell in behind him, dogging

respectfully after him, a few paces away. A moment later a second big

claw joined it. Silently, the claws trailed him, as he walked slowly

toward the bunker.



Hendricks stopped, and behind him, the claws came to a halt. He was

close, now. Almost to the bunker steps.



"Scott! Can you hear me? I'm standing right above you. Outside. On the

surface. Are you picking me up?"



       *       *       *       *       *



He waited, holding his gun against his side, the transmitter tightly

to his ear. Time passed. He strained to hear, but there was only

silence. Silence, and faint static.



Then, distantly, metallically--



"This is Scott."



The voice was neutral. Cold. He could not identify it. But the

earphone was minute.



"Scott! Listen. I'm standing right above you. I'm on the surface,

looking down into the bunker entrance."



"Yes."



"Can you see me?"



"Yes."



"Through the view sight? You have the sight trained on me?"



"Yes."



Hendricks pondered. A circle of claws waited quietly around him,

gray-metal bodies on all sides of him. "Is everything all right in the

bunker? Nothing unusual has happened?"



"Everything is all right."



"Will you come up to the surface? I want to see you for a moment."

Hendricks took a deep breath. "Come up here with me. I want to talk to

you."



"Come down."



"I'm giving you an order."



Silence.



"Are you coming?" Hendricks listened. There was no response. "I order

you to come to the surface."



"Come down."



Hendricks set his jaw. "Let me talk to Leone."



There was a long pause. He listened to the static. Then a voice came,

hard, thin, metallic. The same as the other. "This is Leone."



"Hendricks. I'm on the surface. At the bunker entrance. I want one of

you to come up here."



"Come down."



"Why come down? I'm giving you an order!"



Silence. Hendricks lowered the transmitter. He looked carefully around

him. The entrance was just ahead. Almost at his feet. He lowered the

antenna and fastened the transmitter to his belt. Carefully, he

gripped his gun with both hands. He moved forward, a step at a time.

If they could see him they knew he was starting toward the entrance.

He closed his eyes a moment.



Then he put his foot on the first step that led downward.



Two Davids came up at him, their faces identical and expressionless.

He blasted them into particles. More came rushing silently up, a whole

pack of them. All exactly the same.



Hendricks turned and raced back, away from the bunker, back toward the

rise.



At the top of the rise Tasso and Klaus were firing down. The small

claws were already streaking up toward them, shining metal spheres

going fast, racing frantically through the ash. But he had no time to

think about that. He knelt down, aiming at the bunker entrance, gun

against his cheek. The Davids were coming out in groups, clutching

their teddy bears, their thin knobby legs pumping as they ran up the

steps to the surface. Hendricks fired into the main body of them. They

burst apart, wheels and springs flying in all directions. He fired

again through the mist of particles.



A giant lumbering figure rose up in the bunker entrance, tall and

swaying. Hendricks paused, amazed. A man, a soldier. With one leg,

supporting himself with a crutch.



"Major!" Tasso's voice came. More firing. The huge figure moved

forward, Davids swarming around it. Hendricks broke out of his freeze.

The First Variety. The Wounded Soldier.



He aimed and fired. The soldier burst into bits, parts and relays

flying. Now many Davids were out on the flat ground, away from the

bunker. He fired again and again, moving slowly back, half-crouching

and aiming.



From the rise, Klaus fired down. The side of the rise was alive with

claws making their way up. Hendricks retreated toward the rise,

running and crouching. Tasso had left Klaus and was circling slowly to

the right, moving away from the rise.



A David slipped up toward him, its small white face expressionless,

brown hair hanging down in its eyes. It bent over suddenly, opening

its arms. Its teddy bear hurtled down and leaped across the ground,

bounding toward him. Hendricks fired. The bear and the David both

dissolved. He grinned, blinking. It was like a dream.



"Up here!" Tasso's voice. Hendricks made his way toward her. She was

over by some columns of concrete, walls of a ruined building. She was

firing past him, with the hand pistol Klaus had given her.



"Thanks." He joined her, grasping for breath. She pulled him back,

behind the concrete, fumbling at her belt.



"Close your eyes!" She unfastened a globe from her waist. Rapidly, she

unscrewed the cap, locking it into place. "Close your eyes and get

down."



       *       *       *       *       *



She threw the bomb. It sailed in an arc, an expert, rolling and

bouncing to the entrance of the bunker. Two Wounded Soldiers stood

uncertainly by the brick pile. More Davids poured from behind them,

out onto the plain. One of the Wounded Soldiers moved toward the bomb,

stooping awkwardly down to pick it up.



The bomb went off. The concussion whirled Hendricks around, throwing

him on his face. A hot wind rolled over him. Dimly he saw Tasso

standing behind the columns, firing slowly and methodically at the

Davids coming out of the raging clouds of white fire.



Back along the rise Klaus struggled with a ring of claws circling

around him. He retreated, blasting at them and moving back, trying to

break through the ring.



Hendricks struggled to his feet. His head ached. He could hardly see.

Everything was licking at him, raging and whirling. His right arm

would not move.



Tasso pulled back toward him. "Come on. Let's go."



"Klaus--He's still up there."



"Come on!" Tasso dragged Hendricks back, away from the columns.

Hendricks shook his head, trying to clear it. Tasso led him rapidly

away, her eyes intense and bright, watching for claws that had escaped

the blast.



One David came out of the rolling clouds of flame. Tasso blasted it.

No more appeared.



"But Klaus. What about him?" Hendricks stopped, standing unsteadily.

"He--"



"Come on!"



       *       *       *       *       *



They retreated, moving farther and farther away from the bunker. A few

small claws followed them for a little while and then gave up, turning

back and going off.



At last Tasso stopped. "We can stop here and get our breaths."



Hendricks sat down on some heaps of debris. He wiped his neck,

gasping. "We left Klaus back there."



Tasso said nothing. She opened her gun, sliding a fresh round of blast

cartridges into place.



Hendricks stared at her, dazed. "You left him back there on purpose."



Tasso snapped the gun together. She studied the heaps of rubble around

them, her face expressionless. As if she were watching for something.



"What is it?" Hendricks demanded. "What are you looking for? Is

something coming?" He shook his head, trying to understand. What was

she doing? What was she waiting for? He could see nothing. Ash lay all

around them, ash and ruins. Occasional stark tree trunks, without

leaves or branches. "What--"



Tasso cut him off. "Be still." Her eyes narrowed. Suddenly her gun

came up. Hendricks turned, following her gaze.



       *       *       *       *       *



Back the way they had come a figure appeared. The figure walked

unsteadily toward them. Its clothes were torn. It limped as it made

its way along, going very slowly and carefully. Stopping now and then,

resting and getting its strength. Once it almost fell. It stood for a

moment, trying to steady itself. Then it came on.



Klaus.



Hendricks stood up. "Klaus!" He started toward him. "How the hell did

you--"



Tasso fired. Hendricks swung back. She fired again, the blast passing

him, a searing line of heat. The beam caught Klaus in the chest. He

exploded, gears and wheels flying. For a moment he continued to walk.

Then he swayed back and forth. He crashed to the ground, his arms

flung out. A few more wheels rolled away.



Silence.



Tasso turned to Hendricks. "Now you understand why he killed Rudi."



Hendricks sat down again slowly. He shook his head. He was numb. He

could not think.



"Do you see?" Tasso said. "Do you understand?"



Hendricks said nothing. Everything was slipping away from him, faster

and faster. Darkness, rolling and plucking at him.



He closed his eyes.



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks opened his eyes slowly. His body ached all over. He tried to

sit up but needles of pain shot through his arm and shoulder. He

gasped.



"Don't try to get up," Tasso said. She bent down, putting her cold

hand against his forehead.



It was night. A few stars glinted above, shining through the drifting

clouds of ash. Hendricks lay back, his teeth locked. Tasso watched him

impassively. She had built a fire with some wood and weeds. The fire

licked feebly, hissing at a metal cup suspended over it. Everything

was silent. Unmoving darkness, beyond the fire.



"So he was the Second Variety," Hendricks murmured.



"I had always thought so."



"Why didn't you destroy him sooner?" he wanted to know.



"You held me back." Tasso crossed to the fire to look into the metal

cup. "Coffee. It'll be ready to drink in awhile."



She came back and sat down beside him. Presently she opened her pistol

and began to disassemble the firing mechanism, studying it intently.



"This is a beautiful gun," Tasso said, half-aloud. "The construction

is superb."



"What about them? The claws."



"The concussion from the bomb put most of them out of action. They're

delicate. Highly organized, I suppose."



"The Davids, too?"



"Yes."



"How did you happen to have a bomb like that?"



Tasso shrugged. "We designed it. You shouldn't underestimate our

technology, Major. Without such a bomb you and I would no longer

exist."



"Very useful."



Tasso stretched out her legs, warming her feet in the heat of the

fire. "It surprised me that you did not seem to understand, after he

killed Rudi. Why did you think he--"



"I told you. I thought he was afraid."



"Really? You know, Major, for a little while I suspected you. Because

you wouldn't let me kill him. I thought you might be protecting him."

She laughed.



"Are we safe here?" Hendricks asked presently.



"For awhile. Until they get reinforcements from some other area."

Tasso began to clean the interior of the gun with a bit of rag. She

finished and pushed the mechanism back into place. She closed the gun,

running her finger along the barrel.



"We were lucky," Hendricks murmured.



"Yes. Very lucky."



"Thanks for pulling me away."



       *       *       *       *       *



Tasso did not answer. She glanced up at him, her eyes bright in the

fire light. Hendricks examined his arm. He could not move his fingers.

His whole side seemed numb. Down inside him was a dull steady ache.



"How do you feel?" Tasso asked.



"My arm is damaged."



"Anything else?"



"Internal injuries."



"You didn't get down when the bomb went off."



Hendricks said nothing. He watched Tasso pour the coffee from the cup

into a flat metal pan. She brought it over to him.



"Thanks." He struggled up enough to drink. It was hard to swallow. His

insides turned over and he pushed the pan away. "That's all I can

drink now."



Tasso drank the rest. Time passed. The clouds of ash moved across the

dark sky above them. Hendricks rested, his mind blank. After awhile he

became aware that Tasso was standing over him, gazing down at him.



"What is it?" he murmured.



"Do you feel any better?"



"Some."



"You know, Major, if I hadn't dragged you away they would have got

you. You would be dead. Like Rudi."



"I know."



"Do you want to know why I brought you out? I could have left you. I

could have left you there."



"Why did you bring me out?"



"Because we have to get away from here." Tasso stirred the fire with a

stick, peering calmly down into it. "No human being can live here.

When their reinforcements come we won't have a chance. I've pondered

about it while you were unconscious. We have perhaps three hours

before they come."



"And you expect me to get us away?"



"That's right. I expect you to get us out of here."



"Why me?"



"Because I don't know any way." Her eyes shone at him in the

half-light, bright and steady. "If you can't get us out of here

they'll kill us within three hours. I see nothing else ahead. Well,

Major? What are you going to do? I've been waiting all night. While

you were unconscious I sat here, waiting and listening. It's almost

dawn. The night is almost over."



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks considered. "It's curious," he said at last.



"Curious?"



"That you should think I can get us out of here. I wonder what you

think I can do."



"Can you get us to the Moon Base?"



"The Moon Base? How?"



"There must be some way."



Hendricks shook his head. "No. There's no way that I know of."



Tasso said nothing. For a moment her steady gaze wavered. She ducked

her head, turning abruptly away. She scrambled to her feet. "More

coffee?"



"No."



"Suit yourself." Tasso drank silently. He could not see her face. He

lay back against the ground, deep in thought, trying to concentrate.

It was hard to think. His head still hurt. And the numbing daze still

hung over him.



"There might be one way," he said suddenly.



"Oh?"



"How soon is dawn?"



"Two hours. The sun will be coming up shortly."



"There's supposed to be a ship near here. I've never seen it. But I

know it exists."



"What kind of a ship?" Her voice was sharp.



"A rocket cruiser."



"Will it take us off? To the Moon Base?"



"It's supposed to. In case of emergency." He rubbed his forehead.



"What's wrong?"



"My head. It's hard to think. I can hardly--hardly concentrate. The

bomb."



"Is the ship near here?" Tasso slid over beside him, settling down on

her haunches. "How far is it? Where is it?"



"I'm trying to think."



Her fingers dug into his arm. "Nearby?" Her voice was like iron.

"Where would it be? Would they store it underground? Hidden

underground?"



"Yes. In a storage locker."



"How do we find it? Is it marked? Is there a code marker to identify

it?"



Hendricks concentrated. "No. No markings. No code symbol."



"What, then?"



"A sign."



"What sort of sign?"



       *       *       *       *       *



Hendricks did not answer. In the flickering light his eyes were

glazed, two sightless orbs. Tasso's fingers dug into his arm.



"What sort of sign? What is it?"



"I--I can't think. Let me rest."



"All right." She let go and stood up. Hendricks lay back against the

ground, his eyes closed. Tasso walked away from him, her hands in her

pockets. She kicked a rock out of her way and stood staring up at the

sky. The night blackness was already beginning to fade into gray.

Morning was coming.



Tasso gripped her pistol and walked around the fire in a circle, back

and forth. On the ground Major Hendricks lay, his eyes closed,

unmoving. The grayness rose in the sky, higher and higher. The

landscape became visible, fields of ash stretching out in all

directions. Ash and ruins of buildings, a wall here and there, heaps

of concrete, the naked trunk of a tree.



The air was cold and sharp. Somewhere a long way off a bird made a few

bleak sounds.



Hendricks stirred. He opened his eyes. "Is it dawn? Already?"



"Yes."



Hendricks sat up a little. "You wanted to know something. You were

asking me."



"Do you remember now?"



"Yes."



"What is it?" She tensed. "What?" she repeated sharply.



"A well. A ruined well. It's in a storage locker under a well."



"A well." Tasso relaxed. "Then we'll find a well." She looked at her

watch. "We have about an hour, Major. Do you think we can find it in

an hour?"



       *       *       *       *       *



"Give me a hand up," Hendricks said.



Tasso put her pistol away and helped him to his feet. "This is going

to be difficult."



"Yes it is." Hendricks set his lips tightly. "I don't think we're

going to go very far."



They began to walk. The early sun cast a little warmth down on them.

The land was flat and barren, stretching out gray and lifeless as far

as they could see. A few birds sailed silently, far above them,

circling slowly.



"See anything?" Hendricks said. "Any claws?"



"No. Not yet."



They passed through some ruins, upright concrete and bricks. A cement

foundation. Rats scuttled away. Tasso jumped back warily.



"This used to be a town," Hendricks said. "A village. Provincial

village. This was all grape country, once. Where we are now."



They came onto a ruined street, weeds and cracks criss-crossing it.

Over to the right a stone chimney stuck up.



"Be careful," he warned her.



A pit yawned, an open basement. Ragged ends of pipes jutted up,

twisted and bent. They passed part of a house, a bathtub turned on its

side. A broken chair. A few spoons and bits of china dishes. In the

center of the street the ground had sunk away. The depression was

filled with weeds and debris and bones.



"Over here," Hendricks murmured.



"This way?"



"To the right."



They passed the remains of a heavy duty tank. Hendricks' belt counter

clicked ominously. The tank had been radiation blasted. A few feet

from the tank a mummified body lay sprawled out, mouth open. Beyond

the road was a flat field. Stones and weeds, and bits of broken glass.



"There," Hendricks said.



       *       *       *       *       *



A stone well jutted up, sagging and broken. A few boards lay across

it. Most of the well had sunk into rubble. Hendricks walked unsteadily

toward it, Tasso beside him.



"Are you certain about this?" Tasso said. "This doesn't look like

anything."



"I'm sure." Hendricks sat down at the edge of the well, his teeth

locked. His breath came quickly. He wiped perspiration from his face.

"This was arranged so the senior command officer could get away. If

anything happened. If the bunker fell."



"That was you?"



"Yes."



"Where is the ship? Is it here?"



"We're standing on it." Hendricks ran his hands over the surface of

the well stones. "The eye-lock responds to me, not to anybody else.

It's my ship. Or it was supposed to be."



There was a sharp click. Presently they heard a low grating sound from

below them.



"Step back," Hendricks said. He and Tasso moved away from the well.



A section of the ground slid back. A metal frame pushed slowly up

through the ash, shoving bricks and weeds out of the way. The action

ceased, as the ship nosed into view.



"There it is," Hendricks said.



The ship was small. It rested quietly, suspended in its mesh frame,

like a blunt needle. A rain of ash sifted down into the dark cavity

from which the ship had been raised. Hendricks made his way over to

it. He mounted the mesh and unscrewed the hatch, pulling it back.

Inside the ship the control banks and the pressure seat were visible.



       *       *       *       *       *



Tasso came and stood beside him, gazing into the ship. "I'm not

accustomed to rocket piloting," she said, after awhile.



Hendricks glanced at her. "I'll do the piloting."



"Will you? There's only one seat, Major. I can see it's built to carry

only a single person."



Hendricks' breathing changed. He studied the interior of the ship

intently. Tasso was right. There was only one seat. The ship was built

to carry only one person. "I see," he said slowly. "And the one person

is you."



She nodded.



"Of course."



"Why?"



"_You_ can't go. You might not live through the trip. You're injured.

You probably wouldn't get there."



"An interesting point. But you see, I know where the Moon Base is. And

you don't. You might fly around for months and not find it. It's well

hidden. Without knowing what to look for--"



"I'll have to take my chances. Maybe I won't find it. Not by myself.

But I think you'll give me all the information I need. Your life

depends on it."



"How?"



"If I find the Moon Base in time, perhaps I can get them to send a

ship back to pick you up. _If_ I find the Base in time. If not, then

you haven't a chance. I imagine there are supplies on the ship. They

will last me long enough--"



Hendricks moved quickly. But his injured arm betrayed him. Tasso

ducked, sliding lithely aside. Her hand came up, lightning fast.

Hendricks saw the gun butt coming. He tried to ward off the blow, but

she was too fast. The metal butt struck against the side of his head,

just above his ear. Numbing pain rushed through him. Pain and rolling

clouds of blackness. He sank down, sliding to the ground.



       *       *       *       *       *



Dimly, he was aware that Tasso was standing over him, kicking him with

her toe.



"Major! Wake up."



He opened his eyes, groaning.



"Listen to me." She bent down, the gun pointed at his face. "I have to

hurry. There isn't much time left. The ship is ready to go, but you

must tell me the information I need before I leave."



Hendricks shook his head, trying to clear it.



"Hurry up! Where is the Moon Base? How do I find it? What do I look

for?"



Hendricks said nothing.



"Answer me!"



"Sorry."



"Major, the ship is loaded with provisions. I can coast for weeks.

I'll find the Base eventually. And in a half hour you'll be dead. Your

only chance of survival--" She broke off.



Along the slope, by some crumbling ruins, something moved. Something

in the ash. Tasso turned quickly, aiming. She fired. A puff of flame

leaped. Something scuttled away, rolling across the ash. She fired

again. The claw burst apart, wheels flying.



"See?" Tasso said. "A scout. It won't be long."



"You'll bring them back here to get me?"



"Yes. As soon as possible."



Hendricks looked up at her. He studied her intently. "You're telling

the truth?" A strange expression had come over his face, an avid

hunger. "You will come back for me? You'll get me to the Moon Base?"



"I'll get you to the Moon Base. But tell me where it is! There's only

a little time left."



"All right." Hendricks picked up a piece of rock, pulling himself to a

sitting position. "Watch."



Hendricks began to scratch in the ash. Tasso stood by him, watching

the motion of the rock. Hendricks was sketching a crude lunar map.



       *       *       *       *       *



"This is the Appenine range. Here is the Crater of Archimedes. The

Moon Base is beyond the end of the Appenine, about two hundred miles.

I don't know exactly where. No one on Terra knows. But when you're

over the Appenine, signal with one red flare and a green flare,

followed by two red flares in quick succession. The Base monitor will

record your signal. The Base is under the surface, of course. They'll

guide you down with magnetic grapples."



"And the controls? Can I operate them?"



"The controls are virtually automatic. All you have to do is give the

right signal at the right time."



"I will."



"The seat absorbs most of the take-off shock. Air and temperature are

automatically controlled. The ship will leave Terra and pass out into

free space. It'll line itself up with the moon, falling into an orbit

around it, about a hundred miles above the surface. The orbit will

carry you over the Base. When you're in the region of the Appenine,

release the signal rockets."



Tasso slid into the ship and lowered herself into the pressure seat.

The arm locks folded automatically around her. She fingered the

controls. "Too bad you're not going, Major. All this put here for you,

and you can't make the trip."



"Leave me the pistol."



Tasso pulled the pistol from her belt. She held it in her hand,

weighing it thoughtfully. "Don't go too far from this location. It'll

be hard to find you, as it is."



"No. I'll stay here by the well."



Tasso gripped the take-off switch, running her fingers over the smooth

metal. "A beautiful ship, Major. Well built. I admire your

workmanship. You people have always done good work. You build fine

things. Your work, your creations, are your greatest achievement."



"Give me the pistol," Hendricks said impatiently, holding out his

hand. He struggled to his feet.



"Good-bye, Major." Tasso tossed the pistol past Hendricks. The pistol

clattered against the ground, bouncing and rolling away. Hendricks

hurried after it. He bent down, snatching it up.



The hatch of the ship clanged shut. The bolts fell into place.

Hendricks made his way back. The inner door was being sealed. He

raised the pistol unsteadily.



       *       *       *       *       *



There was a shattering roar. The ship burst up from its metal cage,

fusing the mesh behind it. Hendricks cringed, pulling back. The ship

shot up into the rolling clouds of ash, disappearing into the sky.



Hendricks stood watching a long time, until even the streamer had

dissipated. Nothing stirred. The morning air was chill and silent. He

began to walk aimlessly back the way they had come. Better to keep

moving around. It would be a long time before help came--if it came at

all.



He searched his pockets until he found a package of cigarettes. He lit

one grimly. They had all wanted cigarettes from him. But cigarettes

were scarce.



A lizard slithered by him, through the ash. He halted, rigid. The

lizard disappeared. Above, the sun rose higher in the sky. Some flies

landed on a flat rock to one side of him. Hendricks kicked at them

with his foot.



It was getting hot. Sweat trickled down his face, into his collar. His

mouth was dry.



Presently he stopped walking and sat down on some debris. He

unfastened his medicine kit and swallowed a few narcotic capsules. He

looked around him. Where was he?



Something lay ahead. Stretched out on the ground. Silent and unmoving.



Hendricks drew his gun quickly. It looked like a man. Then he

remembered. It was the remains of Klaus. The Second Variety. Where

Tasso had blasted him. He could see wheels and relays and metal parts,

strewn around on the ash. Glittering and sparkling in the sunlight.



Hendricks got to his feet and walked over. He nudged the inert form

with his foot, turning it over a little. He could see the metal hull,

the aluminum ribs and struts. More wiring fell out. Like viscera.

Heaps of wiring, switches and relays. Endless motors and rods.



He bent down. The brain cage had been smashed by the fall. The

artificial brain was visible. He gazed at it. A maze of circuits.

Miniature tubes. Wires as fine as hair. He touched the brain cage. It

swung aside. The type plate was visible. Hendricks studied the plate.



And blanched.



IV--IV.



For a long time he stared at the plate. Fourth Variety. Not the

Second. They had been wrong. There were more types. Not just three.

Many more, perhaps. At least four. And Klaus wasn't the Second

Variety.



But if Klaus wasn't the Second Variety--



Suddenly he tensed. Something was coming, walking through the ash

beyond the hill. What was it? He strained to see. Figures. Figures

coming slowly along, making their way through the ash.



Coming toward him.



Hendricks crouched quickly, raising his gun. Sweat dripped down into

his eyes. He fought down rising panic, as the figures neared.



The first was a David. The David saw him and increased its pace. The

others hurried behind it. A second David. A third. Three Davids, all

alike, coming toward him silently, without expression, their thin legs

rising and falling. Clutching their teddy bears.



He aimed and fired. The first two Davids dissolved into particles. The

third came on. And the figure behind it. Climbing silently toward him

across the gray ash. A Wounded Soldier, towering over the David. And--



       *       *       *       *       *



And behind the Wounded Soldier came two Tassos, walking side by side.

Heavy belt, Russian army pants, shirt, long hair. The familiar figure,

as he had seen her only a little while before. Sitting in the pressure

seat of the ship. Two slim, silent figures, both identical.



They were very near. The David bent down suddenly, dropping its teddy

bear. The bear raced across the ground. Automatically, Hendricks'

fingers tightened around the trigger. The bear was gone, dissolved

into mist. The two Tasso Types moved on, expressionless, walking side

by side, through the gray ash.



When they were almost to him, Hendricks raised the pistol waist high

and fired.



The two Tassos dissolved. But already a new group was starting up the

rise, five or six Tassos, all identical, a line of them coming rapidly

toward him.



And he had given her the ship and the signal code. Because of him she

was on her way to the moon, to the Moon Base. He had made it possible.



He had been right about the bomb, after all. It had been designed with

knowledge of the other types, the David Type and the Wounded Soldier

Type. And the Klaus Type. Not designed by human beings. It had been

designed by one of the underground factories, apart from all human

contact.



The line of Tassos came up to him. Hendricks braced himself, watching

them calmly. The familiar face, the belt, the heavy shirt, the bomb

carefully in place.



The bomb--



As the Tassos reached for him, a last ironic thought drifted through

Hendricks' mind. He felt a little better, thinking about it. The bomb.

Made by the Second Variety to destroy the other varieties. Made for

that end alone.



They were already beginning to design weapons to use against each

other.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Second Variety, by Philip Kindred Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net











    This etext was produced from _Science Fiction Stories_ 1953.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed.









    _A little whimsy, now and then, makes for good balance.

    Theoretically, you could find this type of humor anywhere. But

    only a topflight science-fictionist, we thought, could have

    written this story, in just this way...._









_The Eyes Have It_



by PHILIP K. DICK





It was quite by accident I discovered this incredible invasion of

Earth by lifeforms from another planet. As yet, I haven't done

anything about it; I can't think of anything to do. I wrote to the

Government, and they sent back a pamphlet on the repair and

maintenance of frame houses. Anyhow, the whole thing is known; I'm not

the first to discover it. Maybe it's even under control.



I was sitting in my easy-chair, idly turning the pages of a

paperbacked book someone had left on the bus, when I came across the

reference that first put me on the trail. For a moment I didn't

respond. It took some time for the full import to sink in. After I'd

comprehended, it seemed odd I hadn't noticed it right away.



The reference was clearly to a nonhuman species of incredible

properties, not indigenous to Earth. A species, I hasten to point out,

customarily masquerading as ordinary human beings. Their disguise,

however, became transparent in the face of the following observations

by the author. It was at once obvious the author knew everything. Knew

everything--and was taking it in his stride. The line (and I tremble

remembering it even now) read:



    _... his eyes slowly roved about the room._



Vague chills assailed me. I tried to picture the eyes. Did they roll

like dimes? The passage indicated not; they seemed to move through the

air, not over the surface. Rather rapidly, apparently. No one in the

story was surprised. That's what tipped me off. No sign of amazement

at such an outrageous thing. Later the matter was amplified.



    _... his eyes moved from person to person._



There it was in a nutshell. The eyes had clearly come apart from the

rest of him and were on their own. My heart pounded and my breath

choked in my windpipe. I had stumbled on an accidental mention of a

totally unfamiliar race. Obviously non-Terrestrial. Yet, to the

characters in the book, it was perfectly natural--which suggested they

belonged to the same species.



And the author? A slow suspicion burned in my mind. The author was

taking it rather _too easily_ in his stride. Evidently, he felt this

was quite a usual thing. He made absolutely no attempt to conceal this

knowledge. The story continued:



    _... presently his eyes fastened on Julia._



Julia, being a lady, had at least the breeding to feel indignant. She

is described as blushing and knitting her brows angrily. At this, I

sighed with relief. They weren't _all_ non-Terrestrials. The narrative

continues:



    _... slowly, calmly, his eyes examined every inch of her._



Great Scott! But here the girl turned and stomped off and the matter

ended. I lay back in my chair gasping with horror. My wife and family

regarded me in wonder.



"What's wrong, dear?" my wife asked.



I couldn't tell her. Knowledge like this was too much for the ordinary

run-of-the-mill person. I had to keep it to myself. "Nothing," I

gasped. I leaped up, snatched the book, and hurried out of the room.



       *       *       *       *       *



In the garage, I continued reading. There was more. Trembling, I read

the next revealing passage:



    _... he put his arm around Julia. Presently she asked him if

    he would remove his arm. He immediately did so, with a smile._



It's not said what was done with the arm after the fellow had removed

it. Maybe it was left standing upright in the corner. Maybe it was

thrown away. I don't care. In any case, the full meaning was there,

staring me right in the face.



Here was a race of creatures capable of removing portions of their

anatomy at will. Eyes, arms--and maybe more. Without batting an

eyelash. My knowledge of biology came in handy, at this point.

Obviously they were simple beings, uni-cellular, some sort of

primitive single-celled things. Beings no more developed than

starfish. Starfish can do the same thing, you know.



I read on. And came to this incredible revelation, tossed off coolly

by the author without the faintest tremor:



    _... outside the movie theater we split up. Part of us went

    inside, part over to the cafe for dinner._



Binary fission, obviously. Splitting in half and forming two entities.

Probably each lower half went to the cafe, it being farther, and the

upper halves to the movies. I read on, hands shaking. I had really

stumbled onto something here. My mind reeled as I made out this

passage:



    _... I'm afraid there's no doubt about it. Poor Bibney has

    lost his head again._



Which was followed by:



    _... and Bob says he has utterly no guts._



Yet Bibney got around as well as the next person. The next person,

however, was just as strange. He was soon described as:



    _... totally lacking in brains._



       *       *       *       *       *



There was no doubt of the thing in the next passage. Julia, whom I had

thought to be the one normal person, reveals herself as also being an

alien life form, similar to the rest:



    _... quite deliberately, Julia had given her heart to the

    young man._



It didn't relate what the final disposition of the organ was, but I

didn't really care. It was evident Julia had gone right on living in

her usual manner, like all the others in the book. Without heart,

arms, eyes, brains, viscera, dividing up in two when the occasion

demanded. Without a qualm.



    _... thereupon she gave him her hand._



I sickened. The rascal now had her hand, as well as her heart. I

shudder to think what he's done with them, by this time.



    _... he took her arm._



Not content to wait, he had to start dismantling her on his own.

Flushing crimson, I slammed the book shut and leaped to my feet. But

not in time to escape one last reference to those carefree bits of

anatomy whose travels had originally thrown me on the track:



    _... her eyes followed him all the way down the road and

    across the meadow._



I rushed from the garage and back inside the warm house, as if the

accursed things were following me. My wife and children were playing

Monopoly in the kitchen. I joined them and played with frantic fervor,

brow feverish, teeth chattering.



I had had enough of the thing. I want to hear no more about it. Let

them come on. Let them invade Earth. I don't want to get mixed up in

it.



I have absolutely no stomach for it.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Eyes Have It, by Philip Kindred Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net



















TONY and the BEETLES



by Philip K. Dick



[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Orbit volume 1

number 2, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that

the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]





[Illustration: A TEN-YEAR-OLD BOY GROWS UP FAST WHEN HISTORY CATCHES UP

WITH THE HUMAN RACE.]





Reddish-yellow sunlight filtered through the thick quartz windows into

the sleep-compartment. Tony Rossi yawned, stirred a little, then opened

his black eyes and sat up quickly. With one motion he tossed the covers

back and slid to the warm metal floor. He clicked off his alarm clock

and hurried to the closet.



It looked like a nice day. The landscape outside was motionless,

undisturbed by winds or dust-shift. The boy's heart pounded excitedly.

He pulled his trousers on, zipped up the reinforced mesh, struggled into

his heavy canvas shirt, and then sat down on the edge of the cot to tug

on his boots. He closed the seams around their tops and then did the

same with his gloves. Next he adjusted the pressure on his pump unit and

strapped it between his shoulder blades. He grabbed his helmet from the

dresser, and he was ready for the day.



In the dining-compartment his mother and father had finished breakfast.

Their voices drifted to him as he clattered down the ramp. A disturbed

murmur; he paused to listen. What were they talking about? Had he done

something wrong, again?



And then he caught it. Behind their voices was another voice. Static and

crackling pops. The all-system audio signal from Rigel IV. They had it

turned up full blast; the dull thunder of the monitor's voice boomed

loudly. The war. Always the war. He sighed, and stepped out into the

dining-compartment.



"Morning," his father muttered.



"Good morning, dear," his mother said absently. She sat with her head

turned to one side, wrinkles of concentration webbing her forehead. Her

thin lips were drawn together in a tight line of concern. His father had

pushed his dirty dishes back and was smoking, elbows on the table, dark

hairy arms bare and muscular. He was scowling, intent on the jumbled

roar from the speaker above the sink.



"How's it going?" Tony asked. He slid into his chair and reached

automatically for the ersatz grapefruit. "Any news from Orion?"



Neither of them answered. They didn't hear him. He began to eat his

grapefruit. Outside, beyond the little metal and plastic housing unit,

sounds of activity grew. Shouts and muffled crashes, as rural merchants

and their trucks rumbled along the highway toward Karnet. The reddish

daylight swelled; Betelgeuse was rising quietly and majestically.



"Nice day," Tony said. "No flux wind. I think I'll go down to the

n-quarter awhile. We're building a neat spaceport, a model, of course,

but we've been able to get enough materials to lay out strips for--"



With a savage snarl his father reached out and struck the audio roar

immediately died. "I knew it!" He got up and moved angrily away from the

table. "I told them it would happen. They shouldn't have moved so soon.

Should have built up Class A supply bases, first."



"Isn't our main fleet moving in from Bellatrix?" Tony's mother fluttered

anxiously. "According to last night's summary the worst that can happen

is Orion IX and X will be dumped."



Joseph Rossi laughed harshly. "The hell with last night's summary. They

know as well as I do what's happening."



"What's happening?" Tony echoed, as he pushed aside his grapefruit and

began to ladle out dry cereal. "Are we losing the battle?"



"Yes!" His father's lips twisted. "Earthmen, losing to--to _beetles_. I

told them. But they couldn't wait. My God, there's ten good years left

in this system. Why'd they have to push on? Everybody knew Orion would

be tough. The whole damn beetle fleet's strung out around there. Waiting

for us. And we have to barge right in."



"But nobody ever thought beetles would fight," Leah Rossi protested

mildly. "Everybody thought they'd just fire a few blasts and then--"



"They _have_ to fight! Orion's the last jump-off. If they don't fight

here, where the hell can they fight?" Rossi swore savagely. "Of course

they're fighting. We have all their planets except the inner Orion

string--not that they're worth much, but it's the principle of the

thing. If we'd built up strong supply bases, we could have broken up the

beetle fleet and really clobbered it."



"Don't say 'beetle,'" Tony murmured, as he finished his cereal. "They're

Pas-udeti, same as here. The word 'beetle' comes from Betelgeuse. An

Arabian word we invented ourselves."



Joe Rossi's mouth opened and closed. "What are you, a goddamn

beetle-lover?"



"Joe," Leah snapped. "For heaven's sake."



Rossi moved toward the door. "If I was ten years younger I'd be out

there. I'd really show those shiny-shelled insects what the hell they're

up against. Them and their junky beat-up old hulks. Converted

freighters!" His eyes blazed. "When I think of them shooting down Terran

cruisers with _our_ boys in them--"



"Orion's their system," Tony murmured.



"_Their_ system! When the hell did you get to be an authority on space

law? Why, I ought to--" He broke off, choked with rage. "My own kid," he

muttered. "One more crack out of you today and I'll hang one on you

you'll feel the rest of the week."



Tony pushed his chair back. "I won't be around here today. I'm going

into Karnet, with my EEP."



"Yeah, to play with beetles!"



Tony said nothing. He was already sliding his helmet in place and

snapping the clamps tight. As he pushed through the back door, into the

lock membrane, he unscrewed his oxygen tap and set the tank filter into

action. An automatic response, conditioned by a lifetime spent on a

colony planet in an alien system.



       *       *       *       *       *



A faint flux wind caught at him and swept yellow-red dust around his

boots. Sunlight glittered from the metal roof of his family's housing

unit, one of endless rows of squat boxes set in the sandy slope,

protected by the line of ore-refining installations against the horizon.

He made an impatient signal, and from the storage shed his EEP came

gliding out, catching the sunlight on its chrome trim.



"We're going down into Karnet," Tony said, unconsciously slipping into

the Pas dialect. "Hurry up!"



The EEP took up its position behind him, and he started briskly down the

slope, over the shifting sand, toward the road. There were quite a few

traders out, today. It was a good day for the market; only a fourth of

the year was fit for travel. Betelgeuse was an erratic and undependable

sun, not at all like Sol (according to the edutapes, fed to Tony four

hours a day, six days a week--he had never seen Sol himself).



He reached the noisy road. Pas-udeti were everywhere. Whole groups of

them, with their primitive combustion-driven trucks, battered and

filthy, motors grinding protestingly. He waved at the trucks as they

pushed past him. After a moment one slowed down. It was piled with

_tis_, bundled heaps of gray vegetables dried, and prepared for the

table. A staple of the Pas-udeti diet. Behind the wheel lounged a

dark-faced elderly Pas, one arm over the open window, a rolled leaf

between his lips. He was like all other Pas-udeti; lank and

hard-shelled, encased in a brittle sheath in which he lived and died.



"You want a ride?" the Pas murmured--required protocol when an Earthman

on foot was encountered.



"Is there room for my EEP?"



The Pas made a careless motion with his claw. "It can run behind."

Sardonic amusement touched his ugly old face. "If it gets to Karnet

we'll sell it for scrap. We can use a few condensers and relay tubing.

We're short on electronic maintenance stuff."



"I know," Tony said solemnly, as he climbed into the cabin of the truck.

"It's all been sent to the big repair base at Orion I. For your

warfleet."



Amusement vanished from the leathery face. "Yes, the warfleet." He

turned away and started up the truck again. In the back, Tony's EEP had

scrambled up on the load of _tis_ and was gripping precariously with its

magnetic lines.



Tony noticed the Pas-udeti's sudden change of expression, and he was

puzzled. He started to speak to him--but now he noticed unusual

quietness among the other Pas, in the other trucks, behind and in front

of his own. The war, of course. It had swept through this system a

century ago; these people had been left behind. Now all eyes were on

Orion, on the battle between the Terran warfleet and the Pas-udeti

collection of armed freighters.



"Is it true," Tony asked carefully, "that you're winning?"



The elderly Pas grunted. "We hear rumors."



Tony considered. "My father says Terra went ahead too fast. He says we

should have consolidated. We didn't assemble adequate supply bases. He

used to be an officer, when he was younger. He was with the fleet for

two years."



The Pas was silent a moment. "It's true," he said at last, "that when

you're so far from home, supply is a great problem. We, on the other

hand, don't have that. We have no distances to cover."



"Do you know anybody fighting?"



"I have distant relatives." The answer was vague; the Pas obviously

didn't want to talk about it.



"Have you ever seen your warfleet?"



"Not as it exists now. When this system was defeated most of our units

were wiped out. Remnants limped to Orion and joined the Orion fleet."



"Your relatives were with the remnants?"



"That's right."



"Then you were alive when this planet was taken?"



"Why do you ask?" The old Pas quivered violently. "What business is it

of yours?"



Tony leaned out and watched the walls and buildings of Karnet grow ahead

of them. Karnet was an old city. It had stood thousands of years. The

Pas-udeti civilization was stable; it had reached a certain point of

technocratic development and then leveled off. The Pas had inter-system

ships that had carried people and freight between planets in the days

before the Terran Confederation. They had combustion-driven cars,

audiophones, a power network of a magnetic type. Their plumbing was

satisfactory and their medicine was highly advanced. They had art forms,

emotional and exciting. They had a vague religion.



"Who do you think will win the battle?" Tony asked.



"I don't know." With a sudden jerk the old Pas brought the truck to a

crashing halt. "This is as far as I go. Please get out and take your

EEP with you."



Tony faltered in surprise. "But aren't you going--?"



"No farther!"



Tony pushed the door open. He was vaguely uneasy; there was a hard,

fixed expression on the leathery face, and the old creature's voice had

a sharp edge he had never heard before. "Thanks," he murmured. He hopped

down into the red dust and signaled his EEP. It released its magnetic

lines, and instantly the truck started up with a roar, passing on inside

the city.



Tony watched it go, still dazed. The hot dust lapped at his ankles; he

automatically moved his feet and slapped at his trousers. A truck

honked, and his EEP quickly moved him from the road, up to the level

pedestrian ramp. Pas-udeti in swarms moved by, endless lines of rural

people hurrying into Karnet on their daily business. A massive public

bus had stopped by the gate and was letting off passengers. Male and

female Pas. And children. They laughed and shouted; the sounds of their

voices blended with the low hum of the city.



"Going in?" a sharp Pas-udeti voice sounded close behind him. "Keep

moving--you're blocking the ramp."



It was a young female, with a heavy armload clutched in her claws. Tony

felt embarrassed; female Pas had a certain telepathic ability, part of

their sexual make-up. It was effective on Earthmen at close range.



"Here," she said. "Give me a hand."



Tony nodded his head, and the EEP accepted the female's heavy armload.

"I'm visiting the city," Tony said, as they moved with the crowd toward

the gates. "I got a ride most of the way, but the driver let me off out

here."



"You're from the settlement?"



"Yes."



She eyed him critically. "You've always lived here, haven't you?"



"I was born here. My family came here from Earth four years before I was

born. My father was an officer in the fleet. He earned an Emigration

Priority."



"So you've never seen your own planet. How old are you?"



"Ten years. Terran."



"You shouldn't have asked the driver so many questions."



They passed through the decontamination shield and into the city. An

information square loomed ahead; Pas men and women were packed around

it. Moving chutes and transport cars rumbled everywhere. Buildings and

ramps and open-air machinery; the city was sealed in a protective

dust-proof envelope. Tony unfastened his helmet and clipped it to his

belt. The air was stale-smelling, artificial, but usable.



"Let me tell you something," the young female said carefully, as she

strode along the foot-ramp beside Tony. "I wonder if this is a good day

for you to come into Karnet. I know you've been coming here regularly to

play with your friends. But perhaps today you ought to stay at home, in

your settlement."



"Why?"



"Because today everybody is upset."



"I know," Tony said. "My mother and father were upset. They were

listening to the news from our base in the Rigel system."



"I don't mean your family. Other people are listening, too. These people

here. My race."



"They're upset, all right," Tony admitted. "But I come here all the

time. There's nobody to play with at the settlement, and anyhow we're

working on a project."



"A model spaceport."



"That's right." Tony was envious. "I sure wish I was a telepath. It must

be fun."



The female Pas-udeti was silent. She was deep in thought. "What would

happen," she asked, "if your family left here and returned to Earth?"



"That couldn't happen. There's no room for us on Earth. C-bombs

destroyed most of Asia and North America back in the Twentieth Century."



"Suppose you _had_ to go back?"



Tony did not understand. "But we can't. Habitable portions of Earth are

overcrowded. Our main problem is finding places for Terrans to live, in

other systems." He added, "And anyhow, I don't particularly want to go

to Terra. I'm used to it here. All my friends are here."



"I'll take my packages," the female said. "I go this other way, down

this third-level ramp."



Tony nodded to his EEP and it lowered the bundles into the female's

claws. She lingered a moment, trying to find the right words.



"Good luck," she said.



"With what?"



She smiled faintly, ironically. "With your model spaceport. I hope you

and your friends get to finish it."



"Of course we'll finish it," Tony said, surprised. "It's almost done."

What did she mean?



The Pas-udeti woman hurried off before he could ask her. Tony was

troubled and uncertain; more doubts filled him. After a moment he headed

slowly into the lane that took him toward the residential section of the

city. Past the stores and factories, to the place where his friends

lived.



The group of Pas-udeti children eyed him silently as he approached. They

had been playing in the shade of an immense _hengelo_, whose ancient

branches drooped and swayed with the air currents pumped through the

city. Now they sat unmoving.



"I didn't expect you today," B'prith said, in an expressionless voice.



Tony halted awkwardly, and his EEP did the same. "How are things?" he

murmured.



"Fine."



"I got a ride part way."



"Fine."



Tony squatted down in the shade. None of the Pas children stirred. They

were small, not as large as Terran children. Their shells had not

hardened, had not turned dark and opaque, like horn. It gave them a

soft, unformed appearance, but at the same time it lightened their load.

They moved more easily than their elders; they could hop and skip

around, still. But they were not skipping right now.



"What's the matter?" Tony demanded. "What's wrong with everybody?"



No one answered.



"Where's the model?" he asked. "Have you fellows been working on it?"



After a moment Llyre nodded slightly.



Tony felt dull anger rise up inside him. "Say something! What's the

matter? What're you all mad about?"



"Mad?" B'prith echoed. "We're not mad."



Tony scratched aimlessly in the dust. He knew what it was. The war,

again. The battle going on near Orion. His anger burst up wildly.

"Forget the war. Everything was fine yesterday, before the battle."



"Sure," Llyre said. "It was fine."



Tony caught the edge to his voice. "It happened a hundred years ago.

It's not my fault."



"Sure," B'prith said.



"This is my home. Isn't it? Haven't I got as much right here as anybody

else? I was born here."



"Sure," Llyre said, tonelessly.



Tony appealed to them helplessly. "Do you have to act this way? You

didn't act this way yesterday. I was here yesterday--all of us were here

yesterday. What's happened since yesterday?"



"The battle," B'prith said.



"What difference does _that_ make? Why does that change everything?

There's always war. There've been battles all the time, as long as I can

remember. What's different about this?"



B'prith broke apart a clump of dirt with his strong claws. After a

moment he tossed it away and got slowly to his feet. "Well," he said

thoughtfully, "according to our audio relay, it looks as if our fleet is

going to win, this time."



"Yes," Tony agreed, not understanding. "My father says we didn't build

up adequate supply bases. We'll probably have to fall back to...." And

then the impact hit him. "You mean, for the first time in a hundred

years--"



"Yes," Llyre said, also getting up. The others got up, too. They moved

away from Tony, toward the near-by house. "We're winning. The Terran

flank was turned, half an hour ago. Your right wing has folded

completely."



Tony was stunned. "And it matters. It matters to all of you."



"Matters!" B'prith halted, suddenly blazing out in fury. "Sure it

matters! For the first time--in a century. The first time in our lives

we're beating you. We have you on the run, you--" He choked out the

word, almost spat it out. "You white-grubs!"



They disappeared into the house. Tony sat gazing stupidly down at the

ground, his hands still moving aimlessly. He had heard the word before,

seen it scrawled on walls and in the dust near the settlement.

_White-grubs._ The Pas term of derision for Terrans. Because of their

softness, their whiteness. Lack of hard shells. Pulpy, doughy skin. But

they had never dared say it out loud, before. To an Earthman's face.



Beside him, his EEP stirred restlessly. Its intricate radio mechanism

sensed the hostile atmosphere. Automatic relays were sliding into place;

circuits were opening and closing.



"It's all right," Tony murmured, getting slowly up. "Maybe we'd better

go back."



He moved unsteadily toward the ramp, completely shaken. The EEP walked

calmly ahead, its metal face blank and confident, feeling nothing,

saying nothing. Tony's thoughts were a wild turmoil; he shook his head,

but the crazy spinning kept up. He couldn't make his mind slow down,

lock in place.



"Wait a minute," a voice said. B'prith's voice, from the open doorway.

Cold and withdrawn, almost unfamiliar.



"What do you want?"



B'prith came toward him, claws behind his back in the formal Pas-udeti

posture, used between total strangers. "You shouldn't have come here,

today."



"I know," Tony said.



B'prith got out a bit of _tis_ stalk and began to roll it into a tube.

He pretended to concentrate on it. "Look," he said. "You said you have a

right here. But you don't."



"I--" Tony murmured.



"Do you understand why not? You said it isn't your fault. I guess not.

But it's not my fault, either. Maybe it's nobody's fault. I've known you

a long time."



"Five years. Terran."



B'prith twisted the stalk up and tossed it away. "Yesterday we played

together. We worked on the spaceport. But we can't play today. My family

said to tell you not to come here any more." He hesitated, and did not

look Tony in the face. "I was going to tell you, anyhow. Before they

said anything."



"Oh," Tony said.



"Everything that's happened today--the battle, our fleet's stand. We

didn't know. We didn't dare hope. You see? A century of running. First

this system. Then the Rigel system, all the planets. Then the other

Orion stars. We fought here and there--scattered fights. Those that got

away joined up. We supplied the base at Orion--you people didn't know.

But there was no hope; at least, nobody thought there was." He was

silent a moment. "Funny," he said, "what happens when your back's to the

wall, and there isn't any further place to go. Then you have to fight."



"If our supply bases--" Tony began thickly, but B'prith cut him off

savagely.



"Your supply bases! Don't you understand? We're beating you! Now you'll

have to get out! All you white-grubs. Out of our system!"



Tony's EEP moved forward ominously. B'prith saw it. He bent down,

snatched up a rock, and hurled it straight at the EEP. The rock clanged

off the metal hull and bounced harmlessly away. B'prith snatched up

another rock. Llyre and the others came quickly out of the house. An

adult Pas loomed up behind them. Everything was happening too fast. More

rocks crashed against the EEP. One struck Tony on the arm.



"Get out!" B'prith screamed. "Don't come back! This is our planet!" His

claws snatched at Tony. "We'll tear you to pieces if you--"



Tony smashed him in the chest. The soft shell gave like rubber, and the

Pas stumbled back. He wobbled and fell over, gasping and screeching.



"_Beetle_," Tony breathed hoarsely. Suddenly he was terrified. A crowd

of Pas-udeti was forming rapidly. They surged on all sides, hostile

faces, dark and angry, a rising thunder of rage.



More stones showered. Some struck the EEP, others fell around Tony, near

his boots. One whizzed past his face. Quickly he slid his helmet in

place. He was scared. He knew his EEP's E-signal had already gone out,

but it would be minutes before a ship could come. Besides, there were

other Earthmen in the city to be taken care of; there were Earthmen all

over the planet. In all the cities. On all the twenty-three Betelgeuse

planets. On the fourteen Rigel planets. On the other Orion planets.



"We have to get out of here," he muttered to the EEP. "Do something!"



A stone hit him on the helmet. The plastic cracked; air leaked out, and

then the autoseal filmed over. More stones were falling. The Pas swarmed

close, a yelling, seething mass of black-sheathed creatures. He could

smell them, the acrid body-odor of insects, hear their claws snap, feel

their weight.



The EEP threw its heat beam on. The beam shifted in a wide band toward

the crowd of Pas-udeti. Crude hand weapons appeared. A clatter of

bullets burst around Tony; they were firing at the EEP. He was dimly

aware of the metal body beside him. A shuddering crash--the EEP was

toppled over. The crowd poured over it; the metal hull was lost from

sight.



Like a demented animal, the crowd tore at the struggling EEP. A few of

them smashed in its head; others tore off struts and shiny arm-sections.

The EEP ceased struggling. The crowd moved away, panting and clutching

jagged remains. They saw Tony.



As the first line of them reached for him, the protective envelope high

above them shattered. A Terran scout ship thundered down, heat beam

screaming. The crowd scattered in confusion, some firing, some throwing

stones, others leaping for safety.



Tony picked himself up and made his way unsteadily toward the spot where

the scout was landing.



       *       *       *       *       *



"I'm sorry," Joe Rossi said gently. He touched his son on the shoulder.

"I shouldn't have let you go down there today. I should have known."



Tony sat hunched over in the big plastic easychair. He rocked back and

forth, face pale with shock. The scout ship which had rescued him had

immediately headed back toward Karnet; there were other Earthmen to

bring out, besides this first load. The boy said nothing. His mind was

blank. He still heard the roar of the crowd, felt its hate--a century of

pent-up fury and resentment. The memory drove out everything else; it

was all around him, even now. And the sight of the floundering EEP, the

metallic ripping sound, as its arms and legs were torn off and carried

away.



His mother dabbed at his cuts and scratches with antiseptic. Joe Rossi

shakily lit a cigarette and said, "If your EEP hadn't been along they'd

have killed you. Beetles." He shuddered. "I never should have let you go

down there. All this time.... They might have done it any time, any day.

Knifed you. Cut you open with their filthy goddamn claws."



Below the settlement the reddish-yellow sunlight glinted on gunbarrels.

Already, dull booms echoed against the crumbling hills. The defense ring

was going into action. Black shapes darted and scurried up the side of

the slope. Black patches moved out from Karnet, toward the Terran

settlement, across the dividing line the Confederation surveyors had set

up a century ago. Karnet was a bubbling pot of activity. The whole city

rumbled with feverish excitement.



Tony raised his head. "They--they turned our flank."



"Yeah." Joe Rossi stubbed out his cigarette. "They sure did. That was at

one o'clock. At two they drove a wedge right through the center of our

line. Split the fleet in half. Broke it up--sent it running. Picked us

off one by one as we fell back. Christ, they're like maniacs. Now that

they've got the scent, the taste of our blood."



"But it's getting better," Leah fluttered. "Our main fleet units are

beginning to appear."



"We'll get them," Joe muttered. "It'll take a while. But by God we'll

wipe them out. Every last one of them. If it takes a thousand years.

We'll follow every last ship down--we'll get them all." His voice rose

in frenzy. "Beetles! Goddamn insects! When I think of them, trying to

hurt my kid, with their filthy black claws--"



"If you were younger, you'd be in the line," Leah said. "It's not your

fault you're too old. The heart strain's too great. You did your job.

They can't let an older person take chances. It's not your fault."



Joe clenched his fists. "I feel so--futile. If there was only something

I could do."



"The fleet will take care of them," Leah said soothingly. "You said so

yourself. They'll hunt every one of them down. Destroy them all. There's

nothing to worry about."



Joe sagged miserably. "It's no use. Let's cut it out. Let's stop kidding

ourselves."



"What do you mean?"



"Face it! We're not going to win, not this time. We went too far. Our

time's come."



There was silence.



Tony sat up a little. "When did you know?"



"I've known a long time."



"I found out today. I didn't understand, at first. This is--stolen

ground. I was born here, but it's stolen ground."



"Yes. It's stolen. It doesn't belong to us."



"We're here because we're stronger. But now we're not stronger. We're

being beaten."



"They know Terrans can be licked. Like anybody else." Joe Rossi's face

was gray and flabby. "We took their planets away from them. Now they're

taking them back. It'll be a while, of course. We'll retreat slowly.

It'll be another five centuries going back. There're a lot of systems

between here and Sol."



Tony shook his head, still uncomprehending. "Even Llyre and B'prith. All

of them. Waiting for their time to come. For us to lose and go away

again. Where we came from."



Joe Rossi paced back and forth. "Yeah, we'll be retreating from now on.

Giving ground, instead of taking it. It'll be like this today--losing

fights, draws. Stalemates and worse."



He raised his feverish eyes toward the ceiling of the little metal

housing unit, face wild with passion and misery.



"But, by God, we'll give them a run for their money. All the way back!

Every inch!"











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tony and the Beetles, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















[Illustration]





                PIPER IN THE WOODS



                       _By

                 Philip K. Dick_





        Earth maintained an important garrison on

 Asteroid Y-3. Now suddenly it was imperiled with

 a biological impossibility--men becoming plants!





"Well, Corporal Westerburg," Doctor Henry Harris said gently, "just why

do you think you're a plant?"



As he spoke, Harris glanced down again at the card on his desk. It was

from the Base Commander himself, made out in Cox's heavy scrawl: _Doc,

this is the lad I told you about. Talk to him and try to find out how he

got this delusion. He's from the new Garrison, the new check-station on

Asteroid Y-3, and we don't want anything to go wrong there. Especially a

silly damn thing like this!_



Harris pushed the card aside and stared back up at the youth across the

desk from him. The young man seemed ill at ease and appeared to be

avoiding answering the question Harris had put to him. Harris frowned.

Westerburg was a good-looking chap, actually handsome in his Patrol

uniform, a shock of blond hair over one eye. He was tall, almost six

feet, a fine healthy lad, just two years out of Training, according to

the card. Born in Detroit. Had measles when he was nine. Interested in

jet engines, tennis, and girls. Twenty-six years old.



"Well, Corporal Westerburg," Doctor Harris said again. "Why do you think

you're a plant?"



The Corporal looked up shyly. He cleared his throat. "Sir, I _am_ a

plant, I don't just think so. I've been a plant for several days, now."



"I see." The Doctor nodded. "You mean that you weren't always a plant?"



"No, sir. I just became a plant recently."



"And what were you before you became a plant?"



"Well, sir, I was just like the rest of you."



There was silence. Doctor Harris took up his pen and scratched a few

lines, but nothing of importance came. A plant? And such a

healthy-looking lad! Harris removed his steel-rimmed glasses and

polished them with his handkerchief. He put them on again and leaned

back in his chair. "Care for a cigarette, Corporal?"



"No, sir."



The Doctor lit one himself, resting his arm on the edge of the chair.

"Corporal, you must realize that there are very few men who become

plants, especially on such short notice. I have to admit you are the

first person who has ever told me such a thing."



"Yes, sir, I realize it's quite rare."



"You can understand why I'm interested, then. When you say you're a

plant, you mean you're not capable of mobility? Or do you mean you're a

vegetable, as opposed to an animal? Or just what?"



The Corporal looked away. "I can't tell you any more," he murmured. "I'm

sorry, sir."



"Well, would you mind telling me _how_ you became a plant?"



Corporal Westerburg hesitated. He stared down at the floor, then out the

window at the spaceport, then at a fly on the desk. At last he stood up,

getting slowly to his feet. "I can't even tell you that, sir," he said.



"You can't? Why not?"



"Because--because I promised not to."



       *       *       *       *       *



The room was silent. Doctor Harris rose, too, and they both stood facing

each other. Harris frowned, rubbing his jaw. "Corporal, just _who_ did

you promise?"



"I can't even tell you that, sir. I'm sorry."



The Doctor considered this. At last he went to the door and opened it.

"All right, Corporal. You may go now. And thanks for your time."



"I'm sorry I'm not more helpful." The Corporal went slowly out and

Harris closed the door after him. Then he went across his office to the

vidphone. He rang Commander Cox's letter. A moment later the beefy

good-natured face of the Base Commander appeared.



"Cox, this is Harris. I talked to him, all right. All I could get is the

statement that he's a plant. What else is there? What kind of behavior

pattern?"



"Well," Cox said, "the first thing they noticed was that he wouldn't do

any work. The Garrison Chief reported that this Westerburg would wander

off outside the Garrison and just sit, all day long. Just sit."



"In the sun?"



"Yes. Just sit in the sun. Then at nightfall he would come back in. When

they asked why he wasn't working in the jet repair building he told them

he had to be out in the sun. Then he said--" Cox hesitated.



"Yes? Said what?"



"He said that work was unnatural. That it was a waste of time. That the

only worthwhile thing was to sit and contemplate--outside."



"What then?"



"Then they asked him how he got that idea, and then he revealed to them

that he had become a plant."



"I'm going to have to talk to him again, I can see," Harris said. "And

he's applied for a permanent discharge from the Patrol? What reason did

he give?"



"The same, that he's a plant now, and has no more interest in being a

Patrolman. All he wants to do is sit in the sun. It's the damnedest

thing I ever heard."



"All right. I think I'll visit him in his quarters." Harris looked at

his watch. "I'll go over after dinner."



"Good luck," Cox said gloomily. "But who ever heard of a man turning

into a plant? We told him it wasn't possible, but he just smiled at us."



"I'll let you know how I make out," Harris said.



       *       *       *       *       *



Harris walked slowly down the hall. It was after six; the evening meal

was over. A dim concept was coming into his mind, but it was much too

soon to be sure. He increased his pace, turning right at the end of the

hall. Two nurses passed, hurrying by. Westerburg was quartered with a

buddy, a man who had been injured in a jet blast and who was now almost

recovered. Harris came to the dorm wing and stopped, checking the

numbers on the doors.



"Can I help you, sir?" the robot attendant said, gliding up.



"I'm looking for Corporal Westerburg's room."



"Three doors to the right."



Harris went on. Asteroid Y-3 had only recently been garrisoned and

staffed. It had become the primary check-point to halt and examine ships

entering the system from outer space. The Garrison made sure that no

dangerous bacteria, fungus, or what-not arrived to infect the system. A

nice asteroid it was, warm, well-watered, with trees and lakes and lots

of sunlight. And the most modern Garrison in the nine planets. He shook

his head, coming to the third door. He stopped, raising his hand and

knocking.



"Who's there?" sounded through the door.



"I want to see Corporal Westerburg."



The door opened. A bovine youth with horn-rimmed glasses looked out, a

book in his hand. "Who are you?"



"Doctor Harris."



"I'm sorry, sir. Corporal Westerburg is asleep."



"Would he mind if I woke him up? I want very much to talk to him."

Harris peered inside. He could see a neat room, with a desk, a rug and

lamp, and two bunks. On one of the bunks was Westerburg, lying face up,

his arms folded across his chest, his eyes tightly closed.



"Sir," the bovine youth said, "I'm afraid I can't wake him up for you,

much as I'd like to."



"You can't? Why not?"



"Sir, Corporal Westerburg won't wake up, not after the sun sets. He just

won't. He can't be wakened."



"Cataleptic? Really?"



"But in the morning, as soon as the sun comes up, he leaps out of bed

and goes outside. Stays the whole day."



"I see," the Doctor said. "Well, thanks anyhow." He went back out into

the hall and the door shut after him. "There's more to this than I

realized," he murmured. He went on back the way he had come.



       *       *       *       *       *



It was a warm sunny day. The sky was almost free of clouds and a gentle

wind moved through the cedars along the bank of the stream. There was a

path leading from the hospital building down the slope to the stream. At

the stream a small bridge led over to the other side, and a few patients

were standing on the bridge, wrapped in their bathrobes, looking

aimlessly down at the water.



It took Harris several minutes to find Westerburg. The youth was not

with the other patients, near or around the bridge. He had gone farther

down, past the cedar trees and out onto a strip of bright meadow, where

poppies and grass grew everywhere. He was sitting on the stream bank, on

a flat grey stone, leaning back and staring up, his mouth open a little.

He did not notice the Doctor until Harris was almost beside him.



"Hello," Harris said softly.



Westerburg opened his eyes, looking up. He smiled and got slowly to his

feet, a graceful, flowing motion that was rather surprising for a man of

his size. "Hello, Doctor. What brings you out here?"



"Nothing. Thought I'd get some sun."



"Here, you can share my rock." Westerburg moved over and Harris sat down

gingerly, being careful not to catch his trousers on the sharp edges of

the rock. He lit a cigarette and gazed silently down at the water.

Beside him, Westerburg had resumed his strange position, leaning back,

resting on his hands, staring up with his eyes shut tight.



"Nice day," the Doctor said.



"Yes."



"Do you come here every day?"



"Yes."



"You like it better out here than inside."



"I can't stay inside," Westerburg said.



"You can't? How do you mean, 'can't'?"



"You would die without _air_, wouldn't you?" the Corporal said.



"And you'd die without sunlight?"



Westerburg nodded.



"Corporal, may I ask you something? Do you plan to do this the rest of

your life, sit out in the sun on a flat rock? Nothing else?"



Westerburg nodded.



"How about your job? You went to school for years to become a Patrolman.

You wanted to enter the Patrol very badly. You were given a fine rating

and a first-class position. How do you feel, giving all that up? You

know, it won't be easy to get back in again. Do you realize that?"



"I realize it."



"And you're really going to give it all up?"



"That's right."



       *       *       *       *       *



Harris was silent for a while. At last he put his cigarette out and

turned toward the youth. "All right, let's say you give up your job and

sit in the sun. Well, what happens, then? Someone else has to do the job

instead of you. Isn't that true? The job has to be done, _your_ job has

to be done. And if you don't do it someone else has to."



"I suppose so."



"Westerburg, suppose everyone felt the way you do? Suppose everyone

wanted to sit in the sun all day? What would happen? No one would check

ships coming from outer space. Bacteria and toxic crystals would enter

the system and cause mass death and suffering. Isn't that right?"



"If everyone felt the way I do they wouldn't be going into outer space."



"But they have to. They have to trade, they have to get minerals and

products and new plants."



"Why?"



"To keep society going."



"Why?"



"Well--" Harris gestured. "People couldn't live without society."



Westerburg said nothing to that. Harris watched him, but the youth did

not answer.



"Isn't that right?" Harris said.



"Perhaps. It's a peculiar business, Doctor. You know, I struggled for

years to get through Training. I had to work and pay my own way. Washed

dishes, worked in kitchens. Studied at night, learned, crammed, worked

on and on. And you know what I think, now?"



"What?"



"I wish I'd become a plant earlier."



Doctor Harris stood up. "Westerburg, when you come inside, will you

stop off at my office? I want to give you a few tests, if you don't

mind."



"The shock box?" Westerburg smiled. "I knew that would be coming around.

Sure, I don't mind."



Nettled, Harris left the rock, walking back up the bank a short

distance. "About three, Corporal?"



The Corporal nodded.



Harris made his way up the hill, to the path, toward the hospital

building. The whole thing was beginning to become more clear to him. A

boy who had struggled all his life. Financial insecurity. Idealized

goal, getting a Patrol assignment. Finally reached it, found the load

too great. And on Asteroid Y-3 there was too much vegetation to look at

all day. Primitive identification and projection on the flora of the

asteroid. Concept of security involved in immobility and permanence.

Unchanging forest.



He entered the building. A robot orderly stopped him almost at once.

"Sir, Commander Cox wants you urgently, on the vidphone."



"Thanks." Harris strode to his office. He dialed Cox's letter and the

Commander's face came presently into focus. "Cox? This is Harris. I've

been out talking to the boy. I'm beginning to get this lined up, now. I

can see the pattern, too much load too long. Finally gets what he wants

and the idealization shatters under the--"



"Harris!" Cox barked. "Shut up and listen. I just got a report from Y-3.

They're sending an express rocket here. It's on the way."



"An express rocket?"



"Five more cases like Westerburg. All say they're plants! The Garrison

Chief is worried as hell. Says we _must_ find out what it is or the

Garrison will fall apart, right away. Do you get me, Harris? Find out

what it is!"



"Yes, sir," Harris murmured. "Yes, sir."



       *       *       *       *       *



By the end of the week there were twenty cases, and all, of course, were

from Asteroid Y-3.



Commander Cox and Harris stood together at the top of the hill, looking

gloomily down at the stream below. Sixteen men and four women sat in the

sun along the bank, none of them moving, none speaking. An hour had gone

by since Cox and Harris appeared, and in all that time the twenty people

below had not stirred.



"I don't get it," Cox said, shaking his head. "I just absolutely don't

get it. Harris, is this the beginning of the end? Is everything going to

start cracking around us? It gives me a hell of a strange feeling to see

those people down there, basking away in the sun, just sitting and

basking."



"Who's that man there with the red hair?"



"That's Ulrich Deutsch. He was Second in Command at the Garrison. Now

look at him! Sits and dozes with his mouth open and his eyes shut. A

week ago that man was climbing, going right up to the top. When the

Garrison Chief retires he was supposed to take over. Maybe another year,

at the most. All his life he's been climbing to get up there."



"And now he sits in the sun," Harris finished.



"That woman. The brunette, with the short hair. Career woman. Head of

the entire office staff of the Garrison. And the man beside her.

Janitor. And that cute little gal there, with the bosom. Secretary, just

out of school. All kinds. And I got a note this morning, three more

coming in sometime today."



Harris nodded. "The strange thing is--they really _want_ to sit down

there. They're completely rational; they could do something else, but

they just don't care to."



"Well?" Cox said. "What are you going to do? Have you found anything?

We're counting on you. Let's hear it."



"I couldn't get anything out of them directly," Harris said, "but I've

had some interesting results with the shock box. Let's go inside and

I'll show you."



"Fine," Cox turned and started toward the hospital. "Show me anything

you've got. This is serious. Now I know how Tiberius felt when

Christianity showed up in high places."



       *       *       *       *       *



Harris snapped off the light. The room was pitch black. "I'll run this

first reel for you. The subject is one of the best biologists stationed

at the Garrison. Robert Bradshaw. He came in yesterday. I got a good run

from the shock box because Bradshaw's mind is so highly differentiated.

There's a lot of repressed material of a non-rational nature, more than

usual."



He pressed a switch. The projector whirred, and on the far wall a

three-dimensional image appeared in color, so real that it might have

been the man himself. Robert Bradshaw was a man of fifty, heavy-set,

with iron grey hair and a square jaw. He sat in the chair calmly, his

hands resting on the arms, oblivious to the electrodes attached to his

neck and wrist. "There I go," Harris said. "Watch."



His film-image appeared, approaching Bradshaw. "Now, Mr. Bradshaw," his

image said, "this won't hurt you at all, and it'll help us a lot." The

image rotated the controls on the shock box. Bradshaw stiffened, and his

jaw set, but otherwise he gave no sign. The image of Harris regarded him

for a time and then stepped away from the controls.



"Can you hear me, Mr. Bradshaw?" the image asked.



"Yes."



"What is your name?"



"Robert C. Bradshaw."



"What is your position?"



"Chief Biologist at the check-station on Y-3."



"Are you there now?"



"No, I'm back on Terra. In a hospital."



"Why?"



"Because I admitted to the Garrison Chief that I had become a plant."



"Is that true? That you are a plant."



"Yes, in a non-biological sense. I retain the physiology of a human

being, of course."



"What do you mean, then, that you're a plant?"



"The reference is to attitudinal response, to Weltanschauung."



"Go on."



"It is possible for a warm-blooded animal, an upper primate, to adopt

the psychology of a plant, to some extent."



"Yes?"



"I refer to this."



"And the others? They refer to this also?"



"Yes."



"How did this occur, your adopting this attitude?"



Bradshaw's image hesitated, the lips twisting. "See?" Harris said to

Cox. "Strong conflict. He wouldn't have gone on, if he had been fully

conscious."



"I--"



"Yes?"



"I was taught to become a plant."



The image of Harris showed surprise and interest. "What do you mean, you

were _taught_ to become a plant?"



"They realized my problems and taught me to become a plant. Now I'm free

from them, the problems."



"Who? Who taught you?"



"The Pipers."



"Who? The Pipers? Who are the Pipers?"



There was no answer.



"Mr. Bradshaw, who are the Pipers?"



After a long, agonized pause, the heavy lips parted. "They live in the

woods...."



Harris snapped off the projector, and the lights came on. He and Cox

blinked. "That was all I could get," Harris said. "But I was lucky to

get that. He wasn't supposed to tell, not at all. That was the thing

they all promised not to do, tell who taught them to become plants. The

Pipers who live in the woods, on Asteroid Y-3."



"You got this story from all twenty?"



"No." Harris grimaced. "Most of them put up too much fight. I couldn't

even get _this_ much from them."



Cox reflected. "The Pipers. Well? What do you propose to do? Just wait

around until you can get the full story? Is that your program?"



"No," Harris said. "Not at all. I'm going to Y-3 and find out who the

Pipers are, myself."



       *       *       *       *       *



The small patrol ship made its landing with care and precision, its jets

choking into final silence. The hatch slid back and Doctor Henry Harris

found himself staring out at a field, a brown, sun-baked landing field.

At the end of the field was a tall signal tower. Around the field on all

sides were long grey buildings, the Garrison check-station itself. Not

far off a huge Venusian cruiser was parked, a vast green hulk, like an

enormous lime. The technicians from the station were swarming all over

it, checking and examining each inch of it for lethal life-forms and

poisons that might have attached themselves to the hull.



"All out, sir," the pilot said.



Harris nodded. He took hold of his two suitcases and stepped carefully

down. The ground was hot underfoot, and he blinked in the bright

sunlight. Jupiter was in the sky, and the vast planet reflected

considerable sunlight down onto the asteroid.



Harris started across the field, carrying his suitcases. A field

attendant was already busy opening the storage compartment of the patrol

ship, extracting his trunk. The attendant lowered the trunk into a

waiting dolly and came after him, manipulating the little truck with

bored skill.



As Harris came to the entrance of the signal tower the gate slid back

and a man came forward, an older man, large and robust, with white hair

and a steady walk.



"How are you, Doctor?" he said, holding his hand out. "I'm Lawrence

Watts, the Garrison Chief."



They shook hands. Watts smiled down at Harris. He was a huge old man,

still regal and straight in his dark blue uniform, with his gold

epaulets sparkling on his shoulders.



"Have a good trip?" Watts asked. "Come on inside and I'll have a drink

fixed for you. It gets hot around here, with the Big Mirror up there."



"Jupiter?" Harris followed him inside the building. The signal tower was

cool and dark, a welcome relief. "Why is the gravity so near Terra's? I

expected to go flying off like a kangaroo. Is it artificial?"



"No. There's a dense core of some kind to the asteroid, some kind of

metallic deposit. That's why we picked this asteroid out of all the

others. It made the construction problem much simpler, and it also

explains why the asteroid has natural air and water. Did you see the

hills?"



"The hills?"



"When we get up higher in the tower we'll be able to see over the

buildings. There's quite a natural park here, a regular little forest,

complete with everything you'd want. Come in here, Harris. This is my

office." The old man strode at quite a clip, around the corner and into

a large, well-furnished apartment. "Isn't this pleasant? I intend to

make my last year here as amiable as possible." He frowned. "Of course,

with Deutsch gone, I may be here forever. Oh, well." He shrugged. "Sit

down, Harris."



"Thanks." Harris took a chair, stretching his legs out. He watched Watts

as he closed the door to the hall. "By the way, any more cases come up?"



"Two more today," Watts was grim. "Makes almost thirty, in all. We have

three hundred men in this station. At the rate it's going--"



"Chief, you spoke about a forest on the asteroid. Do you allow the crew

to go into the forest at will? Or do you restrict them to the buildings

and grounds?"



       *       *       *       *       *



Watts rubbed his jaw. "Well, it's a difficult situation, Harris. I have

to let the men leave the grounds sometimes. They can _see_ the forest

from the buildings, and as long as you can see a nice place to stretch

out and relax that does it. Once every ten days they have a full period

of rest. Then they go out and fool around."



"And then it happens?"



"Yes, I suppose so. But as long as they can see the forest they'll want

to go. I can't help it."



"I know. I'm not censuring you. Well, what's your theory? What happens

to them out there? What do they do?"



"What happens? Once they get out there and take it easy for a while they

don't want to come back and work. It's boondoggling. Playing hookey.

They don't want to work, so off they go."



"How about this business of their delusions?"



Watts laughed good-naturedly. "Listen, Harris. You know as well as I do

that's a lot of poppycock. They're no more plants than you or I. They

just don't want to work, that's all. When I was a cadet we had a few

ways to make people work. I wish we could lay a few on their backs, like

we used to."



"You think this is simple goldbricking, then?"



"Don't you think it is?"



"No," Harris said. "They really believe they're plants. I put them

through the high-frequency shock treatment, the shock box. The whole

nervous system is paralyzed, all inhibitions stopped cold. They tell the

truth, then. And they said the same thing--and more."



Watts paced back and forth, his hands clasped behind his back. "Harris,

you're a doctor, and I suppose you know what you're talking about. But

look at the situation here. We have a garrison, a good modern garrison.

We're probably the most modern outfit in the system. Every new device

and gadget is here that science can produce. Harris, this garrison is

one vast machine. The men are parts, and each has his job, the

Maintenance Crew, the Biologists, the Office Crew, the Managerial Staff.



"Look what happens when one person steps away from his job. Everything

else begins to creak. We can't service the bugs if no one services the

machines. We can't order food to feed the crews if no one makes out

reports, takes inventories. We can't direct any kind of activity if the

Second in Command decides to go out and sit in the sun all day.



"Thirty people, one tenth of the Garrison. But we can't run without

them. The Garrison is built that way. If you take the supports out the

whole building falls. No one can leave. We're all tied here, and these

people know it. They know they have no right to do that, run off on

their own. No one has that right anymore. We're all too tightly

interwoven to suddenly start doing what we want. It's unfair to the

rest, the majority."



       *       *       *       *       *



Harris nodded. "Chief, can I ask you something?"



"What is it?"



"Are there any inhabitants on the asteroid? Any natives?"



"Natives?" Watts considered. "Yes, there's some kind of aborigines

living out there." He waved vaguely toward the window.



"What are they like? Have you seen them?"



"Yes, I've seen them. At least, I saw them when we first came here. They

hung around for a while, watching us, then after a time they

disappeared."



"Did they die off? Diseases of some kind?"



"No. They just--just disappeared. Into their forest. They're still

there, someplace."



"What kind of people are they?"



"Well, the story is that they're originally from Mars. They don't look

much like Martians, though. They're dark, a kind of coppery color. Thin.

Very agile, in their own way. They hunt and fish. No written language.

We don't pay much attention to them."



"I see." Harris paused. "Chief, have you ever heard of anything

called--The Pipers?"



"The Pipers?" Watts frowned. "No. Why?"



"The patients mentioned something called The Pipers. According to

Bradshaw, the Pipers taught him to become a plant. He learned it from

them, a kind of teaching."



"The Pipers. What are they?"



"I don't know," Harris admitted. "I thought maybe you might know. My

first assumption, of course, was that they're the natives. But now I'm

not so sure, not after hearing your description of them."



"The natives are primitive savages. They don't have anything to teach

anybody, especially a top-flight biologist."



Harris hesitated. "Chief, I'd like to go into the woods and look around.

Is that possible?"



"Certainly. I can arrange it for you. I'll give you one of the men to

show you around."



"I'd rather go alone. Is there any danger?"



"No, none that I know of. Except--"



"Except the Pipers," Harris finished. "I know. Well, there's only one

way to find them, and that's it. I'll have to take my chances."



       *       *       *       *       *



"If you walk in a straight line," Chief Watts said, "you'll find

yourself back at the Garrison in about six hours. It's a damn small

asteroid. There's a couple of streams and lakes, so don't fall in."



"How about snakes or poisonous insects?"



"Nothing like that reported. We did a lot of tramping around at first,

but it's grown back now, the way it was. We never encountered anything

dangerous."



"Thanks, Chief," Harris said. They shook hands. "I'll see you before

nightfall."



"Good luck." The Chief and his two armed escorts turned and went back

across the rise, down the other side toward the Garrison. Harris watched

them go until they disappeared inside the building. Then he turned and

started into the grove of trees.



The woods were very silent around him as he walked. Trees towered up on

all sides of him, huge dark-green trees like eucalyptus. The ground

underfoot was soft with endless leaves that had fallen and rotted into

soil. After a while the grove of high trees fell behind and he found

himself crossing a dry meadow, the grass and weeds burned brown in the

sun. Insects buzzed around him, rising up from the dry weed-stalks.

Something scuttled ahead, hurrying through the undergrowth. He caught

sight of a grey ball with many legs, scampering furiously, its antennae

weaving.



The meadow ended at the bottom of a hill. He was going up, now, going

higher and higher. Ahead of him an endless expanse of green rose, acres

of wild growth. He scrambled to the top finally, blowing and panting,

catching his breath.



He went on. Now he was going down again, plunging into a deep gully.

Tall ferns grew, as large as trees. He was entering a living Jurassic

forest, ferns that stretched out endlessly ahead of him. Down he went,

walking carefully. The air began to turn cold around him. The floor of

the gully was damp and silent; underfoot the ground was almost wet.



He came out on a level table. It was dark, with the ferns growing up on

all sides, dense growths of ferns, silent and unmoving. He came upon a

natural path, an old stream bed, rough and rocky, but easy to follow.

The air was thick and oppressive. Beyond the ferns he could see the side

of the next hill, a green field rising up.



Something grey was ahead. Rocks, piled-up boulders, scattered and

stacked here and there. The stream bed led directly to them. Apparently

this had been a pool of some kind, a stream emptying from it. He climbed

the first of the boulders awkwardly, feeling his way up. At the top he

paused, resting again.



As yet he had had no luck. So far he had not met any of the natives. It

would be through them that he would find the mysterious Pipers that were

stealing the men away, if such really existed. If he could find the

natives, talk to them, perhaps he could find out something. But as yet

he had been unsuccessful. He looked around. The woods were very silent.

A slight breeze moved through the ferns, rustling them, but that was

all. Where were the natives? Probably they had a settlement of some

sort, huts, a clearing. The asteroid was small; he should be able to

find them by nightfall.



       *       *       *       *       *



He started down the rocks. More rocks rose up ahead and he climbed them.

Suddenly he stopped, listening. Far off, he could hear a sound, the

sound of water. Was he approaching a pool of some kind? He went on

again, trying to locate the sound. He scrambled down rocks and up rocks,

and all around him there was silence, except for the splashing of

distant water. Maybe a waterfall, water in motion. A stream. If he found

the stream he might find the natives.



The rocks ended and the stream bed began again, but this time it was

wet, the bottom muddy and overgrown with moss. He was on the right

track; not too long ago this stream had flowed, probably during the

rainy season. He went up on the side of the stream, pushing through the

ferns and vines. A golden snake slid expertly out of his path. Something

glinted ahead, something sparkling through the ferns. Water. A pool. He

hurried, pushing the vines aside and stepping out, leaving them behind.



He was standing on the edge of a pool, a deep pool sunk in a hollow of

grey rocks, surrounded by ferns and vines. The water was clear and

bright, and in motion, flowing in a waterfall at the far end. It was

beautiful, and he stood watching, marveling at it, the undisturbed

quality of it. Untouched, it was. Just as it had always been, probably.

As long as the asteroid existed. Was he the first to see it? Perhaps. It

was so hidden, so concealed by the ferns. It gave him a strange feeling,

a feeling almost of ownership. He stepped down a little toward the

water.



And it was then he noticed her.



The girl was sitting on the far edge of the pool, staring down into the

water, resting her head on one drawn-up knee. She had been bathing; he

could see that at once. Her coppery body was still wet and glistening

with moisture, sparkling in the sun. She had not seen him. He stopped,

holding his breath, watching her.



She was lovely, very lovely, with long dark hair that wound around her

shoulders and arms. Her body was slim, very slender, with a supple grace

to it that made him stare, accustomed as he was to various forms of

anatomy. How silent she was! Silent and unmoving, staring down at the

water. Time passed, strange, unchanging time, as he watched the girl.

Time might even have ceased, with the girl sitting on the rock staring

into the water, and the rows of great ferns behind her, as rigid as if

they had been painted there.



All at once the girl looked up. Harris shifted, suddenly conscious of

himself as an intruder. He stepped back. "I'm sorry," he murmured. "I'm

from the Garrison. I didn't mean to come poking around."



She nodded without speaking.



"You don't mind?" Harris asked presently.



"No."



So she spoke Terran! He moved a little toward her, around the side of

the pool. "I hope you don't mind my bothering you. I won't be on the

asteroid very long. This is my first day here. I just arrived from

Terra."



She smiled faintly.



"I'm a doctor. Henry Harris." He looked down at her, at the slim coppery

body, gleaming in the sunlight, a faint sheen of moisture on her arms

and thighs. "You might be interested in why I'm here." He paused. "Maybe

you can even help me."



She looked up a little. "Oh?"



"Would you like to help me?"



She smiled. "Yes. Of course."



"That's good. Mind if I sit down?" He looked around and found himself a

flat rock. He sat down slowly, facing her. "Cigarette?"



"No."



"Well, I'll have one." He lit up, taking a deep breath. "You see, we

have a problem at the Garrison. Something has been happening to some of

the men, and it seems to be spreading. We have to find out what causes

it or we won't be able to run the Garrison."



       *       *       *       *       *



He waited for a moment. She nodded slightly. How silent she was! Silent

and unmoving. Like the ferns.



"Well, I've been able to find out a few things from them, and one very

interesting fact stands out. They keep saying that something

called--called The Pipers are responsible for their condition. They say

the Pipers taught them--" He stopped. A strange look had flitted across

her dark, small face. "Do you know the Pipers?"



She nodded.



Acute satisfaction flooded over Harris. "You do? I was sure the natives

would know." He stood up again. "I was sure they would, if the Pipers

really existed. Then they do exist, do they?"



"They exist."



Harris frowned. "And they're here, in the woods?"



"Yes."



"I see." He ground his cigarette out impatiently. "You don't suppose

there's any chance you could take me to them, do you?"



"Take you?"



"Yes. I have this problem and I have to solve it. You see, the Base

Commander on Terra has assigned this to me, this business about the

Pipers. It has to be solved. And I'm the one assigned to the job. So

it's important to me to find them. Do you see? Do you understand?"



She nodded.



"Well, will you take me to them?"



The girl was silent. For a long time she sat, staring down into the

water, resting her head against her knee. Harris began to become

impatient. He fidgeted back and forth, resting first on one leg and

then on the other.



"Well, will you?" he said again. "It's important to the whole Garrison.

What do you say?" He felt around in his pockets. "Maybe I could give you

something. What do I have...." He brought out his lighter. "I could give

you my lighter."



The girl stood up, rising slowly, gracefully, without motion or effort.

Harris' mouth fell open. How supple she was, gliding to her feet in a

single motion! He blinked. Without effort she had stood, seemingly

without _change_. All at once she was standing instead of sitting,

standing and looking calmly at him, her small face expressionless.



"Will you?" he said.



"Yes. Come along." She turned away, moving toward the row of ferns.



Harris followed quickly, stumbling across the rocks. "Fine," he said.

"Thanks a lot. I'm very interested to meet these Pipers. Where are you

taking me, to your village? How much time do we have before nightfall?"



The girl did not answer. She had entered the ferns already, and Harris

quickened his pace to keep from losing her. How silently she glided!



"Wait," he called. "Wait for me."



The girl paused, waiting for him, slim and lovely, looking silently

back.



He entered the ferns, hurrying after her.



       *       *       *       *       *



"Well, I'll be damned!" Commander Cox said. "It sure didn't take you

long." He leaped down the steps two at a time. "Let me give you a hand."



Harris grinned, lugging his heavy suitcases. He set them down and

breathed a sigh of relief. "It isn't worth it," he said. "I'm going to

give up taking so much."



"Come on inside. Soldier, give him a hand." A Patrolman hurried over and

took one of the suitcases. The three men went inside and down the

corridor to Harris' quarters. Harris unlocked the door and the Patrolman

deposited his suitcase inside.



"Thanks," Harris said. He set the other down beside it. "It's good to be

back, even for a little while."



"A little while?"



"I just came back to settle my affairs. I have to return to Y-3 tomorrow

morning."



"Then you didn't solve the problem?"



"I solved it, but I haven't _cured_ it. I'm going back and get to work

right away. There's a lot to be done."



"But you found out what it is?"



"Yes. It was just what the men said. The Pipers."



"The Pipers do exist?"



"Yes." Harris nodded. "They do exist." He removed his coat and put it

over the back of the chair. Then he went to the window and let it down.

Warm spring air rushed into the room. He settled himself on the bed,

leaning back.



"The Pipers exist, all right--in the minds of the Garrison crew! To the

crew, the Pipers are real. The crew created them. It's a mass hypnosis,

a group projection, and all the men there have it, to some degree."



"How did it start?"



"Those men on Y-3 were sent there because they were skilled,

highly-trained men with exceptional ability. All their lives they've

been schooled by complex modern society, fast tempo and high integration

between people. Constant pressure toward some goal, some job to be done.



"Those men are put down suddenly on an asteroid where there are natives

living the most primitive of existence, completely vegetable lives. No

concept of goal, no concept of purpose, and hence no ability to plan.

The natives live the way the animals live, from day to day, sleeping,

picking food from the trees. A kind of Garden-of-Eden existence, without

struggle or conflict."



"So? But--"



"Each of the Garrison crew sees the natives and _unconsciously_ thinks

of his own early life, when he was a child, when _he_ had no worries, no

responsibilities, before he joined modern society. A baby lying in the

sun.



"But he can't admit this to himself! He can't admit that he might _want_

to live like the natives, to lie and sleep all day. So he invents The

Pipers, the idea of a mysterious group living in the woods who trap him,

lead him into their kind of life. Then he can blame _them_, not himself.

They 'teach' him to become a part of the woods."



"What are you going to do? Have the woods burned?"



"No." Harris shook his head. "That's not the answer; the woods are

harmless. The answer is psychotherapy for the men. That's why I'm going

right back, so I can begin work. They've got to be made to see that the

Pipers are inside them, their own unconscious voices calling to them to

give up their responsibilities. They've got to be made to realize that

there are no Pipers, at least, not outside themselves. The woods are

harmless and the natives have nothing to teach anyone. They're primitive

savages, without even a written language. We're seeing a psychological

projection by a whole Garrison of men who want to lay down their work

and take it easy for a while."



The room was silent.



"I see," Cox said presently. "Well, it makes sense." He got to his feet.

"I hope you can do something with the men when you get back."



"I hope so, too," Harris agreed. "And I think I can. After all, it's

just a question of increasing their self-awareness. When they have that

the Pipers will vanish."



Cox nodded. "Well, you go ahead with your unpacking, Doc. I'll see you

at dinner. And maybe before you leave, tomorrow."



"Fine."



       *       *       *       *       *



Harris opened the door and the Commander went out into the hall. Harris

closed the door after him and then went back across the room. He looked

out the window for a moment, his hands in his pockets.



It was becoming evening, the air was turning cool. The sun was just

setting as he watched, disappearing behind the buildings of the city

surrounding the hospital. He watched it go down.



Then he went over to his two suitcases. He was tired, very tired from

his trip. A great weariness was beginning to descend over him. There

were so many things to do, so terribly many. How could he hope to do

them all? Back to the asteroid. And then what?



He yawned, his eyes closing. How sleepy he was! He looked over at the

bed. Then he sat down on the edge of it and took his shoes off. So much

to do, the next day.



He put his shoes in the corner of the room. Then he bent over,

unsnapping one of the suitcases. He opened the suitcase. From it he took

a bulging gunnysack. Carefully, he emptied the contents of the sack out

on the floor. Dirt, rich soft dirt. Dirt he had collected during his

last hours there, dirt he had carefully gathered up.



When the dirt was spread out on the floor he sat down in the middle of

it. He stretched himself out, leaning back. When he was fully

comfortable he folded his hands across his chest and closed his eyes. So

much work to do--But later on, of course. Tomorrow. How warm the dirt

was....



He was sound asleep in a moment.









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Imagination: Stories of Science and

    Fantasy_ February 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any

    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

    Minor spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without

    note.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Piper in the Woods, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net











    This etext was produced from Imagination Stories of Science

    and Fantasy January 1953. Extensive research did not uncover

    any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was

    renewed.









    A human brain-controlled spacecraft would mean mechanical

    perfection. This was accomplished, and something unforeseen: a

    strange entity called--









Mr. Spaceship





_By_





_Philip K. Dick_





[Illustration]



Kramer leaned back. "You can see the situation. How can we deal with a

factor like this? The perfect variable."



"Perfect? Prediction should still be possible. A living thing still

acts from necessity, the same as inanimate material. But the

cause-effect chain is more subtle; there are more factors to be

considered. The difference is quantitative, I think. The reaction of

the living organism parallels natural causation, but with greater

complexity."



Gross and Kramer looked up at the board plates, suspended on the wall,

still dripping, the images hardening into place. Kramer traced a line

with his pencil.



"See that? It's a pseudopodium. They're alive, and so far, a weapon we

can't beat. No mechanical system can compete with that, simple or

intricate. We'll have to scrap the Johnson Control and find something

else."



"Meanwhile the war continues as it is. Stalemate. Checkmate. They

can't get to us, and we can't get through their living minefield."



Kramer nodded. "It's a perfect defense, for them. But there still

might be one answer."



"What's that?"



"Wait a minute." Kramer turned to his rocket expert, sitting with the

charts and files. "The heavy cruiser that returned this week. It

didn't actually touch, did it? It came close but there was no

contact."



"Correct." The expert nodded. "The mine was twenty miles off. The

cruiser was in space-drive, moving directly toward Proxima,

line-straight, using the Johnson Control, of course. It had deflected

a quarter of an hour earlier for reasons unknown. Later it resumed its

course. That was when they got it."



"It shifted," Kramer said. "But not enough. The mine was coming along

after it, trailing it. It's the same old story, but I wonder about the

contact."



"Here's our theory," the expert said. "We keep looking for contact, a

trigger in the pseudopodium. But more likely we're witnessing a

psychological phenomena, a decision without any physical correlative.

We're watching for something that isn't there. The mine _decides_ to

blow up. It sees our ship, approaches, and then decides."



"Thanks." Kramer turned to Gross. "Well, that confirms what I'm

saying. How can a ship guided by automatic relays escape a mine that

decides to explode? The whole theory of mine penetration is that you

must avoid tripping the trigger. But here the trigger is a state of

mind in a complicated, developed life-form."



"The belt is fifty thousand miles deep," Gross added. "It solves

another problem for them, repair and maintenance. The damn things

reproduce, fill up the spaces by spawning into them. I wonder what

they feed on?"



"Probably the remains of our first-line. The big cruisers must be a

delicacy. It's a game of wits, between a living creature and a ship

piloted by automatic relays. The ship always loses." Kramer opened a

folder. "I'll tell you what I suggest."



"Go on," Gross said. "I've already heard ten solutions today. What's

yours?"



"Mine is very simple. These creatures are superior to any mechanical

system, but only because they're alive. Almost any other life-form

could compete with them, any higher life-form. If the yuks can put out

living mines to protect their planets, we ought to be able to harness

some of our own life-forms in a similar way. Let's make use of the

same weapon ourselves."



"Which life-form do you propose to use?"



"I think the human brain is the most agile of known living forms. Do

you know of any better?"



"But no human being can withstand outspace travel. A human pilot would

be dead of heart failure long before the ship got anywhere near

Proxima."



"But we don't need the whole body," Kramer said. "We need only the

brain."



"What?"



"The problem is to find a person of high intelligence who would

contribute, in the same manner that eyes and arms are volunteered."



"But a brain...."



"Technically, it could be done. Brains have been transferred several

times, when body destruction made it necessary. Of course, to a

spaceship, to a heavy outspace cruiser, instead of an artificial body,

that's new."



The room was silent.



"It's quite an idea," Gross said slowly. His heavy square face

twisted. "But even supposing it might work, the big question is

_whose_ brain?"



       *       *       *       *       *



It was all very confusing, the reasons for the war, the nature of the

enemy. The Yucconae had been contacted on one of the outlying planets

of Proxima Centauri. At the approach of the Terran ship, a host of

dark slim pencils had lifted abruptly and shot off into the distance.

The first real encounter came between three of the yuk pencils and a

single exploration ship from Terra. No Terrans survived. After that it

was all out war, with no holds barred.



Both sides feverishly constructed defense rings around their systems.

Of the two, the Yucconae belt was the better. The ring around Proxima

was a living ring, superior to anything Terra could throw against it.

The standard equipment by which Terran ships were guided in outspace,

the Johnson Control, was not adequate. Something more was needed.

Automatic relays were not good enough.



--Not good at all, Kramer thought to himself, as he stood looking down

the hillside at the work going on below him. A warm wind blew along

the hill, rustling the weeds and grass. At the bottom, in the valley,

the mechanics had almost finished; the last elements of the reflex

system had been removed from the ship and crated up.



All that was needed now was the new core, the new central key that

would take the place of the mechanical system. A human brain, the

brain of an intelligent, wary human being. But would the human being

part with it? That was the problem.



Kramer turned. Two people were approaching him along the road, a man

and a woman. The man was Gross, expressionless, heavy-set, walking

with dignity. The woman was--He stared in surprise and growing

annoyance. It was Dolores, his wife. Since they'd separated he had

seen little of her....



"Kramer," Gross said. "Look who I ran into. Come back down with us.

We're going into town."



"Hello, Phil," Dolores said. "Well, aren't you glad to see me?"



He nodded. "How have you been? You're looking fine." She was still

pretty and slender in her uniform, the blue-grey of Internal Security,

Gross' organization.



"Thanks." She smiled. "You seem to be doing all right, too. Commander

Gross tells me that you're responsible for this project, Operation

Head, as they call it. Whose head have you decided on?"



"That's the problem." Kramer lit a cigarette. "This ship is to be

equipped with a human brain instead of the Johnson system. We've

constructed special draining baths for the brain, electronic relays to

catch the impulses and magnify them, a continual feeding duct that

supplies the living cells with everything they need. But--"



"But we still haven't got the brain itself," Gross finished. They

began to walk back toward the car. "If we can get that we'll be ready

for the tests."



"Will the brain remain alive?" Dolores asked. "Is it actually going to

live as part of the ship?"



"It will be alive, but not conscious. Very little life is actually

conscious. Animals, trees, insects are quick in their responses, but

they aren't conscious. In this process of ours the individual

personality, the ego, will cease. We only need the response ability,

nothing more."



Dolores shuddered. "How terrible!"



"In time of war everything must be tried," Kramer said absently. "If

one life sacrificed will end the war it's worth it. This ship might

get through. A couple more like it and there wouldn't be any more

war."



       *       *       *       *       *



They got into the car. As they drove down the road, Gross said, "Have

you thought of anyone yet?"



Kramer shook his head. "That's out of my line."



"What do you mean?"



"I'm an engineer. It's not in my department."



"But all this was your idea."



"My work ends there."



Gross was staring at him oddly. Kramer shifted uneasily.



"Then who is supposed to do it?" Gross said. "I can have my

organization prepare examinations of various kinds, to determine

fitness, that kind of thing--"



"Listen, Phil," Dolores said suddenly.



"What?"



She turned toward him. "I have an idea. Do you remember that professor

we had in college. Michael Thomas?"



Kramer nodded.



"I wonder if he's still alive." Dolores frowned. "If he is he must be

awfully old."



"Why, Dolores?" Gross asked.



"Perhaps an old person who didn't have much time left, but whose mind

was still clear and sharp--"



"Professor Thomas." Kramer rubbed his jaw. "He certainly was a wise

old duck. But could he still be alive? He must have been seventy,

then."



"We could find that out," Gross said. "I could make a routine check."



"What do you think?" Dolores said. "If any human mind could outwit

those creatures--"



"I don't like the idea," Kramer said. In his mind an image had

appeared, the image of an old man sitting behind a desk, his bright

gentle eyes moving about the classroom. The old man leaning forward, a

thin hand raised--



"Keep him out of this," Kramer said.



"What's wrong?" Gross looked at him curiously.



"It's because _I_ suggested it," Dolores said.



"No." Kramer shook his head. "It's not that. I didn't expect anything

like this, somebody I knew, a man I studied under. I remember him very

clearly. He was a very distinct personality."



"Good," Gross said. "He sounds fine."



"We can't do it. We're asking his death!"



"This is war," Gross said, "and war doesn't wait on the needs of the

individual. You said that yourself. Surely he'll volunteer; we can

keep it on that basis."



"He may already be dead," Dolores murmured.



"We'll find that out," Gross said speeding up the car. They drove the

rest of the way in silence.



       *       *       *       *       *



For a long time the two of them stood studying the small wood house,

overgrown with ivy, set back on the lot behind an enormous oak. The

little town was silent and sleepy; once in awhile a car moved slowly

along the distant highway, but that was all.



"This is the place," Gross said to Kramer. He folded his arms. "Quite

a quaint little house."



Kramer said nothing. The two Security Agents behind them were

expressionless.



Gross started toward the gate. "Let's go. According to the check he's

still alive, but very sick. His mind is agile, however. That seems to

be certain. It's said he doesn't leave the house. A woman takes care

of his needs. He's very frail."



They went down the stone walk and up onto the porch. Gross rang the

bell. They waited. After a time they heard slow footsteps. The door

opened. An elderly woman in a shapeless wrapper studied them

impassively.



"Security," Gross said, showing his card. "We wish to see Professor

Thomas."



"Why?"



"Government business." He glanced at Kramer.



Kramer stepped forward. "I was a pupil of the Professor's," he said.

"I'm sure he won't mind seeing us."



The woman hesitated uncertainly. Gross stepped into the doorway. "All

right, mother. This is war time. We can't stand out here."



The two Security agents followed him, and Kramer came reluctantly

behind, closing the door. Gross stalked down the hall until he came to

an open door. He stopped, looking in. Kramer could see the white

corner of a bed, a wooden post and the edge of a dresser.



He joined Gross.



In the dark room a withered old man lay, propped up on endless

pillows. At first it seemed as if he were asleep; there was no motion

or sign of life. But after a time Kramer saw with a faint shock that

the old man was watching them intently, his eyes fixed on them,

unmoving, unwinking.



"Professor Thomas?" Gross said. "I'm Commander Gross of Security. This

man with me is perhaps known to you--"



The faded eyes fixed on Kramer.



"I know him. Philip Kramer.... You've grown heavier, boy." The voice

was feeble, the rustle of dry ashes. "Is it true you're married now?"



"Yes. I married Dolores French. You remember her." Kramer came toward

the bed. "But we're separated. It didn't work out very well. Our

careers--"



"What we came here about, Professor," Gross began, but Kramer cut him

off with an impatient wave.



"Let me talk. Can't you and your men get out of here long enough to

let me talk to him?"



Gross swallowed. "All right, Kramer." He nodded to the two men. The

three of them left the room, going out into the hall and closing the

door after them.



The old man in the bed watched Kramer silently. "I don't think much of

him," he said at last. "I've seen his type before. What's he want?"



"Nothing. He just came along. Can I sit down?" Kramer found a stiff

upright chair beside the bed. "If I'm bothering you--"



"No. I'm glad to see you again, Philip. After so long. I'm sorry your

marriage didn't work out."



"How have you been?"



"I've been very ill. I'm afraid that my moment on the world's stage

has almost ended." The ancient eyes studied the younger man

reflectively. "You look as if you have been doing well. Like everyone

else I thought highly of. You've gone to the top in this society."



Kramer smiled. Then he became serious. "Professor, there's a project

we're working on that I want to talk to you about. It's the first ray

of hope we've had in this whole war. If it works, we may be able to

crack the yuk defenses, get some ships into their system. If we can do

that the war might be brought to an end."



"Go on. Tell me about it, if you wish."



"It's a long shot, this project. It may not work at all, but we have

to give it a try."



"It's obvious that you came here because of it," Professor Thomas

murmured. "I'm becoming curious. Go on."



       *       *       *       *       *



After Kramer finished the old man lay back in the bed without

speaking. At last he sighed.



"I understand. A human mind, taken out of a human body." He sat up a

little, looking at Kramer. "I suppose you're thinking of me."



Kramer said nothing.



"Before I make my decision I want to see the papers on this, the

theory and outline of construction. I'm not sure I like it.--For

reasons of my own, I mean. But I want to look at the material. If

you'll do that--"



"Certainly." Kramer stood up and went to the door. Gross and the two

Security Agents were standing outside, waiting tensely. "Gross, come

inside."



They filed into the room.



"Give the Professor the papers," Kramer said. "He wants to study them

before deciding."



Gross brought the file out of his coat pocket, a manila envelope. He

handed it to the old man on the bed. "Here it is, Professor. You're

welcome to examine it. Will you give us your answer as soon as

possible? We're very anxious to begin, of course."



"I'll give you my answer when I've decided." He took the envelope with

a thin, trembling hand. "My decision depends on what I find out from

these papers. If I don't like what I find, then I will not become

involved with this work in any shape or form." He opened the envelope

with shaking hands. "I'm looking for one thing."



"What is it?" Gross said.



"That's my affair. Leave me a number by which I can reach you when

I've decided."



Silently, Gross put his card down on the dresser. As they went out

Professor Thomas was already reading the first of the papers, the

outline of the theory.



       *       *       *       *       *



Kramer sat across from Dale Winter, his second in line. "What then?"

Winter said.



"He's going to contact us." Kramer scratched with a drawing pen on

some paper. "I don't know what to think."



"What do you mean?" Winter's good-natured face was puzzled.



"Look." Kramer stood up, pacing back and forth, his hands in his

uniform pockets. "He was my teacher in college. I respected him as a

man, as well as a teacher. He was more than a voice, a talking book.

He was a person, a calm, kindly person I could look up to. I always

wanted to be like him, someday. Now look at me."



"So?"



"Look at what I'm asking. I'm asking for his life, as if he were some

kind of laboratory animal kept around in a cage, not a man, a teacher

at all."



"Do you think he'll do it?"



"I don't know." Kramer went to the window. He stood looking out. "In a

way, I hope not."



"But if he doesn't--"



"Then we'll have to find somebody else. I know. There would be

somebody else. Why did Dolores have to--"



The vidphone rang. Kramer pressed the button.



"This is Gross." The heavy features formed. "The old man called me.

Professor Thomas."



"What did he say?" He knew; he could tell already, by the sound of

Gross' voice.



"He said he'd do it. I was a little surprised myself, but apparently

he means it. We've already made arrangements for his admission to the

hospital. His lawyer is drawing up the statement of liability."



Kramer only half heard. He nodded wearily. "All right. I'm glad. I

suppose we can go ahead, then."



"You don't sound very glad."



"I wonder why he decided to go ahead with it."



"He was very certain about it." Gross sounded pleased. "He called me

quite early. I was still in bed. You know, this calls for a

celebration."



"Sure," Kramer said. "It sure does."



       *       *       *       *       *



Toward the middle of August the project neared completion. They stood

outside in the hot autumn heat, looking up at the sleek metal sides of

the ship.



Gross thumped the metal with his hand. "Well, it won't be long. We can

begin the test any time."



"Tell us more about this," an officer in gold braid said. "It's such

an unusual concept."



"Is there really a human brain inside the ship?" a dignitary asked, a

small man in a rumpled suit. "And the brain is actually alive?"



"Gentlemen, this ship is guided by a living brain instead of the usual

Johnson relay-control system. But the brain is not conscious. It will

function by reflex only. The practical difference between it and the

Johnson system is this: a human brain is far more intricate than any

man-made structure, and its ability to adapt itself to a situation, to

respond to danger, is far beyond anything that could be artificially

built."



Gross paused, cocking his ear. The turbines of the ship were beginning

to rumble, shaking the ground under them with a deep vibration. Kramer

was standing a short distance away from the others, his arms folded,

watching silently. At the sound of the turbines he walked quickly

around the ship to the other side. A few workmen were clearing away

the last of the waste, the scraps of wiring and scaffolding. They

glanced up at him and went on hurriedly with their work. Kramer

mounted the ramp and entered the control cabin of the ship. Winter was

sitting at the controls with a Pilot from Space-transport.



"How's it look?" Kramer asked.



"All right." Winter got up. "He tells me that it would be best to take

off manually. The robot controls--" Winter hesitated. "I mean, the

built-in controls, can take over later on in space."



"That's right," the Pilot said. "It's customary with the Johnson

system, and so in this case we should--"



"Can you tell anything yet?" Kramer asked.



"No," the Pilot said slowly. "I don't think so. I've been going over

everything. It seems to be in good order. There's only one thing I

wanted to ask you about." He put his hand on the control board. "There

are some changes here I don't understand."



"Changes?"



"Alterations from the original design. I wonder what the purpose is."



Kramer took a set of the plans from his coat. "Let me look." He turned

the pages over. The Pilot watched carefully over his shoulder.



"The changes aren't indicated on your copy," the Pilot said. "I

wonder--" He stopped. Commander Gross had entered the control cabin.



"Gross, who authorized alterations?" Kramer said. "Some of the wiring

has been changed."



"Why, your old friend." Gross signaled to the field tower through the

window.



"My old friend?"



"The Professor. He took quite an active interest." Gross turned to the

Pilot. "Let's get going. We have to take this out past gravity for the

test they tell me. Well, perhaps it's for the best. Are you ready?"



"Sure." The Pilot sat down and moved some of the controls around.

"Anytime."



"Go ahead, then," Gross said.



"The Professor--" Kramer began, but at that moment there was a

tremendous roar and the ship leaped under him. He grasped one of the

wall holds and hung on as best he could. The cabin was filling with a

steady throbbing, the raging of the jet turbines underneath them.



The ship leaped. Kramer closed his eyes and held his breath. They were

moving out into space, gaining speed each moment.



       *       *       *       *       *



"Well, what do you think?" Winter said nervously. "Is it time yet?"



"A little longer," Kramer said. He was sitting on the floor of the

cabin, down by the control wiring. He had removed the metal

covering-plate, exposing the complicated maze of relay wiring. He was

studying it, comparing it to the wiring diagrams.



"What's the matter?" Gross said.



"These changes. I can't figure out what they're for. The only pattern

I can make out is that for some reason--"



"Let me look," the Pilot said. He squatted down beside Kramer. "You

were saying?"



"See this lead here? Originally it was switch controlled. It closed

and opened automatically, according to temperature change. Now it's

wired so that the central control system operates it. The same with

the others. A lot of this was still mechanical, worked by pressure,

temperature, stress. Now it's under the central master."



"The brain?" Gross said. "You mean it's been altered so that the brain

manipulates it?"



Kramer nodded. "Maybe Professor Thomas felt that no mechanical relays

could be trusted. Maybe he thought that things would be happening too

fast. But some of these could close in a split second. The brake

rockets could go on as quickly as--"



"Hey," Winter said from the control seat. "We're getting near the moon

stations. What'll I do?"



They looked out the port. The corroded surface of the moon gleamed up

at them, a corrupt and sickening sight. They were moving swiftly toward

it.



"I'll take it," the Pilot said. He eased Winter out of the way and

strapped himself in place. The ship began to move away from the moon

as he manipulated the controls. Down below them they could see the

observation stations dotting the surface, and the tiny squares that

were the openings of the underground factories and hangars. A red

blinker winked up at them and the Pilot's fingers moved on the board

in answer.



"We're past the moon," the Pilot said, after a time. The moon had

fallen behind them; the ship was heading into outer space. "Well, we

can go ahead with it."



Kramer did not answer.



"Mr. Kramer, we can go ahead any time."



Kramer started. "Sorry. I was thinking. All right, thanks." He

frowned, deep in thought.



"What is it?" Gross asked.



"The wiring changes. Did you understand the reason for them when you

gave the okay to the workmen?"



Gross flushed. "You know I know nothing about technical material. I'm

in Security."



"Then you should have consulted me."



"What does it matter?" Gross grinned wryly. "We're going to have to

start putting our faith in the old man sooner or later."



The Pilot stepped back from the board. His face was pale and set.

"Well, it's done," he said. "That's it."



"What's done?" Kramer said.



"We're on automatic. The brain. I turned the board over to it--to him,

I mean. The Old Man." The Pilot lit a cigarette and puffed nervously.

"Let's keep our fingers crossed."



       *       *       *       *       *



The ship was coasting evenly, in the hands of its invisible pilot. Far

down inside the ship, carefully armoured and protected, a soft human

brain lay in a tank of liquid, a thousand minute electric charges

playing over its surface. As the charges rose they were picked up and

amplified, fed into relay systems, advanced, carried on through the

entire ship--



Gross wiped his forehead nervously. "So _he_ is running it, now. I

hope he knows what he's doing."



Kramer nodded enigmatically. "I think he does."



"What do you mean?"



"Nothing." Kramer walked to the port. "I see we're still moving in a

straight line." He picked up the microphone. "We can instruct the

brain orally, through this." He blew against the microphone

experimentally.



"Go on," Winter said.



"Bring the ship around half-right," Kramer said. "Decrease speed."



They waited. Time passed. Gross looked at Kramer. "No change.

Nothing."



"Wait."



Slowly, the ship was beginning to turn. The turbines missed, reducing

their steady beat. The ship was taking up its new course, adjusting

itself. Nearby some space debris rushed past, incinerating in the

blasts of the turbine jets.



"So far so good," Gross said.



They began to breathe more easily. The invisible pilot had taken

control smoothly, calmly. The ship was in good hands. Kramer spoke a

few more words into the microphone, and they swung again. Now they

were moving back the way they had come, toward the moon.



"Let's see what he does when we enter the moon's pull," Kramer said.

"He was a good mathematician, the old man. He could handle any kind of

problem."



The ship veered, turning away from the moon. The great eaten-away

globe fell behind them.



Gross breathed a sigh of relief. "That's that."



"One more thing." Kramer picked up the microphone. "Return to the moon

and land the ship at the first space field," he said into it.



"Good Lord," Winter murmured. "Why are you--"



"Be quiet." Kramer stood, listening. The turbines gasped and roared as

the ship swung full around, gaining speed. They were moving back, back

toward the moon again. The ship dipped down, heading toward the great

globe below.



"We're going a little fast," the Pilot said. "I don't see how he can

put down at this velocity."



       *       *       *       *       *



The port filled up, as the globe swelled rapidly. The Pilot hurried

toward the board, reaching for the controls. All at once the ship

jerked. The nose lifted and the ship shot out into space, away from

the moon, turning at an oblique angle. The men were thrown to the

floor by the sudden change in course. They got to their feet again,

speechless, staring at each other.



The Pilot gazed down at the board. "It wasn't me! I didn't touch a

thing. I didn't even get to it."



The ship was gaining speed each moment. Kramer hesitated. "Maybe you

better switch it back to manual."



The Pilot closed the switch. He took hold of the steering controls and

moved them experimentally. "Nothing." He turned around. "Nothing. It

doesn't respond."



No one spoke.



"You can see what has happened," Kramer said calmly. "The old man

won't let go of it, now that he has it. I was afraid of this when I

saw the wiring changes. Everything in this ship is centrally

controlled, even the cooling system, the hatches, the garbage release.

We're helpless."



"Nonsense." Gross strode to the board. He took hold of the wheel and

turned it. The ship continued on its course, moving away from the

moon, leaving it behind.



"Release!" Kramer said into the microphone. "Let go of the controls!

We'll take it back. Release."



"No good," the Pilot said. "Nothing." He spun the useless wheel. "It's

dead, completely dead."



"And we're still heading out," Winter said, grinning foolishly. "We'll

be going through the first-line defense belt in a few minutes. If they

don't shoot us down--"



"We better radio back." The Pilot clicked the radio to _send_. "I'll

contact the main bases, one of the observation stations."



"Better get the defense belt, at the speed we're going. We'll be into

it in a minute."



"And after that," Kramer said, "we'll be in outer space. He's moving

us toward outspace velocity. Is this ship equipped with baths?"



"Baths?" Gross said.



"The sleep tanks. For space-drive. We may need them if we go much

faster."



"But good God, where are we going?" Gross said. "Where--where's he

taking us?"



       *       *       *       *       *



The Pilot obtained contact. "This is Dwight, on ship," he said. "We're

entering the defense zone at high velocity. Don't fire on us."



"Turn back," the impersonal voice came through the speaker. "You're

not allowed in the defense zone."



"We can't. We've lost control."



"Lost control?"



"This is an experimental ship."



Gross took the radio. "This is Commander Gross, Security. We're being

carried into outer space. There's nothing we can do. Is there any way

that we can be removed from this ship?"



A hesitation. "We have some fast pursuit ships that could pick you up

if you wanted to jump. The chances are good they'd find you. Do you

have space flares?"



"We do," the Pilot said. "Let's try it."



"Abandon ship?" Kramer said. "If we leave now we'll never see it

again."



"What else can we do? We're gaining speed all the time. Do you propose

that we stay here?"



"No." Kramer shook his head. "Damn it, there ought to be a better

solution."



"Could you contact _him_?" Winter asked. "The Old Man? Try to reason

with him?"



"It's worth a chance," Gross said. "Try it."



"All right." Kramer took the microphone. He paused a moment. "Listen!

Can you hear me? This is Phil Kramer. Can you hear me, Professor. Can

you hear me? I want you to release the controls."



There was silence.



"This is Kramer, Professor. Can you hear me? Do you remember who I am?

Do you understand who this is?"



Above the control panel the wall speaker made a sound, a sputtering

static. They looked up.



"Can you hear me, Professor. This is Philip Kramer. I want you to give

the ship back to us. If you can hear me, release the controls! Let go,

Professor. Let go!"



Static. A rushing sound, like the wind. They gazed at each other.

There was silence for a moment.



"It's a waste of time," Gross said.



"No--listen!"



The sputter came again. Then, mixed with the sputter, almost lost in

it, a voice came, toneless, without inflection, a mechanical, lifeless

voice from the metal speaker in the wall, above their heads.



"... Is it you, Philip? I can't make you out. Darkness.... Who's

there? With you...."



"It's me, Kramer." His fingers tightened against the microphone

handle. "You must release the controls, Professor. We have to get back

to Terra. You must."



Silence. Then the faint, faltering voice came again, a little stronger

than before. "Kramer. Everything so strange. I was right, though.

Consciousness result of thinking. Necessary result. Cognito ergo sum.

Retain conceptual ability. Can you hear me?"



"Yes, Professor--"



"I altered the wiring. Control. I was fairly certain.... I wonder if I

can do it. Try...."



Suddenly the air-conditioning snapped into operation. It snapped

abruptly off again. Down the corridor a door slammed. Something

thudded. The men stood listening. Sounds came from all sides of them,

switches shutting, opening. The lights blinked off; they were in

darkness. The lights came back on, and at the same time the heating

coils dimmed and faded.



"Good God!" Winter said.



Water poured down on them, the emergency fire-fighting system. There

was a screaming rush of air. One of the escape hatches had slid back,

and the air was roaring frantically out into space.



The hatch banged closed. The ship subsided into silence. The heating

coils glowed into life. As suddenly as it had begun the weird

exhibition ceased.



"I can do--everything," the dry, toneless voice came from the wall

speaker. "It is all controlled. Kramer, I wish to talk to you. I've

been--been thinking. I haven't seen you in many years. A lot to

discuss. You've changed, boy. We have much to discuss. Your wife--"



The Pilot grabbed Kramer's arm. "There's a ship standing off our bow.

Look."



       *       *       *       *       *



They ran to the port. A slender pale craft was moving along with them,

keeping pace with them. It was signal-blinking.



"A Terran pursuit ship," the Pilot said. "Let's jump. They'll pick us

up. Suits--"



He ran to a supply cupboard and turned the handle. The door opened and

he pulled the suits out onto the floor.



"Hurry," Gross said. A panic seized them. They dressed frantically,

pulling the heavy garments over them. Winter staggered to the escape

hatch and stood by it, waiting for the others. They joined him, one by

one.



"Let's go!" Gross said. "Open the hatch."



Winter tugged at the hatch. "Help me."



They grabbed hold, tugging together. Nothing happened. The hatch

refused to budge.



"Get a crowbar," the Pilot said.



"Hasn't anyone got a blaster?" Gross looked frantically around. "Damn

it, blast it open!"



"Pull," Kramer grated. "Pull together."



"Are you at the hatch?" the toneless voice came, drifting and eddying

through the corridors of the ship. They looked up, staring around

them. "I sense something nearby, outside. A ship? You are leaving, all

of you? Kramer, you are leaving, too? Very unfortunate. I had hoped we

could talk. Perhaps at some other time you might be induced to

remain."



"Open the hatch!" Kramer said, staring up at the impersonal walls of

the ship. "For God's sake, open it!"



There was silence, an endless pause. Then, very slowly, the hatch slid

back. The air screamed out, rushing past them into space.



One by one they leaped, one after the other, propelled away by the

repulsive material of the suits. A few minutes later they were being

hauled aboard the pursuit ship. As the last one of them was lifted

through the port, their own ship pointed itself suddenly upward and

shot off at tremendous speed. It disappeared.



Kramer removed his helmet, gasping. Two sailors held onto him and

began to wrap him in blankets. Gross sipped a mug of coffee,

shivering.



"It's gone," Kramer murmured.



"I'll have an alarm sent out," Gross said.



"What's happened to your ship?" a sailor asked curiously. "It sure

took off in a hurry. Who's on it?"



"We'll have to have it destroyed," Gross went on, his face grim. "It's

got to be destroyed. There's no telling what it--what _he_ has in

mind." Gross sat down weakly on a metal bench. "What a close call for

us. We were so damn trusting."



"What could he be planning," Kramer said, half to himself. "It doesn't

make sense. I don't get it."



       *       *       *       *       *



As the ship sped back toward the moon base they sat around the table

in the dining room, sipping hot coffee and thinking, not saying very

much.



"Look here," Gross said at last. "What kind of man was Professor

Thomas? What do you remember about him?"



Kramer put his coffee mug down. "It was ten years ago. I don't

remember much. It's vague."



He let his mind run back over the years. He and Dolores had been at

Hunt College together, in physics and the life sciences. The College

was small and set back away from the momentum of modern life. He had

gone there because it was his home town, and his father had gone there

before him.



Professor Thomas had been at the College a long time, as long as

anyone could remember. He was a strange old man, keeping to himself

most of the time. There were many things that he disapproved of, but

he seldom said what they were.



"Do you recall anything that might help us?" Gross asked. "Anything

that would give us a clue as to what he might have in mind?"



Kramer nodded slowly. "I remember one thing...."



One day he and the Professor had been sitting together in the school

chapel, talking leisurely.



"Well, you'll be out of school, soon," the Professor had said. "What

are you going to do?"



"Do? Work at one of the Government Research Projects, I suppose."



"And eventually? What's your ultimate goal?"



Kramer had smiled. "The question is unscientific. It presupposes such

things as ultimate ends."



"Suppose instead along these lines, then: What if there were no war

and no Government Research Projects? What would you do, then?"



"I don't know. But how can I imagine a hypothetical situation like

that? There's been war as long as I can remember. We're geared for

war. I don't know what I'd do. I suppose I'd adjust, get used to it."



The Professor had stared at him. "Oh, you do think you'd get

accustomed to it, eh? Well, I'm glad of that. And you think you could

find something to do?"



Gross listened intently. "What do you infer from this, Kramer?"



"Not much. Except that he was against war."



"We're all against war," Gross pointed out.



"True. But he was withdrawn, set apart. He lived very simply, cooking

his own meals. His wife died many years ago. He was born in Europe, in

Italy. He changed his name when he came to the United States. He used

to read Dante and Milton. He even had a Bible."



"Very anachronistic, don't you think?"



"Yes, he lived quite a lot in the past. He found an old phonograph and

records, and he listened to the old music. You saw his house, how

old-fashioned it was."



"Did he have a file?" Winter asked Gross.



"With Security? No, none at all. As far as we could tell he never

engaged in political work, never joined anything or even seemed to

have strong political convictions."



"No," Kramer, agreed. "About all he ever did was walk through the

hills. He liked nature."



"Nature can be of great use to a scientist," Gross said. "There

wouldn't be any science without it."



"Kramer, what do you think his plan is, taking control of the ship and

disappearing?" Winter said.



"Maybe the transfer made him insane," the Pilot said. "Maybe there's

no plan, nothing rational at all."



"But he had the ship rewired, and he had made sure that he would

retain consciousness and memory before he even agreed to the

operation. He must have had something planned from the start. But

what?"



"Perhaps he just wanted to stay alive longer," Kramer said. "He was

old and about to die. Or--"



"Or what?"



"Nothing." Kramer stood up. "I think as soon as we get to the moon

base I'll make a vidcall to earth. I want to talk to somebody about

this."



"Who's that?" Gross asked.



"Dolores. Maybe she remembers something."



"That's a good idea," Gross said.



       *       *       *       *       *



"Where are you calling from?" Dolores asked, when he succeeded in

reaching her.



"From the moon base."



"All kinds of rumors are running around. Why didn't the ship come

back? What happened?"



"I'm afraid he ran off with it."



"He?"



"The Old Man. Professor Thomas." Kramer explained what had happened.



Dolores listened intently. "How strange. And you think he planned it

all in advance, from the start?"



"I'm certain. He asked for the plans of construction and the

theoretical diagrams at once."



"But why? What for?"



"I don't know. Look, Dolores. What do you remember about him? Is there

anything that might give a clue to all this?"



"Like what?"



"I don't know. That's the trouble."



On the vidscreen Dolores knitted her brow. "I remember he raised

chickens in his back yard, and once he had a goat." She smiled. "Do

you remember the day the goat got loose and wandered down the main

street of town? Nobody could figure out where it came from."



"Anything else?"



"No." He watched her struggling, trying to remember. "He wanted to

have a farm, sometime, I know."



"All right. Thanks." Kramer touched the switch. "When I get back to

Terra maybe I'll stop and see you."



"Let me know how it works out."



He cut the line and the picture dimmed and faded. He walked slowly

back to where Gross and some officers of the Military were sitting at

a chart table, talking.



"Any luck?" Gross said, looking up.



"No. All she remembers is that he kept a goat."



"Come over and look at this detail chart." Gross motioned him around

to his side. "Watch!"



Kramer saw the record tabs moving furiously, the little white dots

racing back and forth.



"What's happening?" he asked.



"A squadron outside the defense zone has finally managed to contact

the ship. They're maneuvering now, for position. Watch."



The white counters were forming a barrel formation around a black dot

that was moving steadily across the board, away from the central

position. As they watched, the white dots constricted around it.



"They're ready to open fire," a technician at the board said.

"Commander, what shall we tell them to do?"



Gross hesitated. "I hate to be the one who makes the decision. When it

comes right down to it--"



"It's not just a ship," Kramer said. "It's a man, a living person. A

human being is up there, moving through space. I wish we knew what--"



"But the order has to be given. We can't take any chances. Suppose he

went over to them, to the yuks."



Kramer's jaw dropped. "My God, he wouldn't do that."



"Are you sure? Do you know what he'll do?"



"He wouldn't do that."



Gross turned to the technician. "Tell them to go ahead."



"I'm sorry, sir, but now the ship has gotten away. Look down at the

board."



       *       *       *       *       *



Gross stared down, Kramer over his shoulder. The black dot had slipped

through the white dots and had moved off at an abrupt angle. The white

dots were broken up, dispersing in confusion.



"He's an unusual strategist," one of the officers said. He traced the

line. "It's an ancient maneuver, an old Prussian device, but it

worked."



The white dots were turning back. "Too many yuk ships out that far,"

Gross said. "Well, that's what you get when you don't act quickly." He

looked up coldly at Kramer. "We should have done it when we had him.

Look at him go!" He jabbed a finger at the rapidly moving black dot.

The dot came to the edge of the board and stopped. It had reached the

limit of the chartered area. "See?"



--Now what? Kramer thought, watching. So the Old Man had escaped the

cruisers and gotten away. He was alert, all right; there was nothing

wrong with his mind. Or with his ability to control his new body.



Body--The ship was a new body for him. He had traded in the old dying

body, withered and frail, for this hulking frame of metal and plastic,

turbines and rocket jets. He was strong, now. Strong and big. The new

body was more powerful than a thousand human bodies. But how long

would it last him? The average life of a cruiser was only ten years.

With careful handling he might get twenty out of it, before some

essential part failed and there was no way to replace it.



And then, what then? What would he do, when something failed and there

was no one to fix it for him? That would be the end. Someplace, far

out in the cold darkness of space, the ship would slow down, silent

and lifeless, to exhaust its last heat into the eternal timelessness

of outer space. Or perhaps it would crash on some barren asteroid,

burst into a million fragments.



It was only a question of time.



"Your wife didn't remember anything?" Gross said.



"I told you. Only that he kept a goat, once."



"A hell of a lot of help that is."



Kramer shrugged. "It's not my fault."



"I wonder if we'll ever see him again." Gross stared down at the

indicator dot, still hanging at the edge of the board. "I wonder if

he'll ever move back this way."



"I wonder, too," Kramer said.



       *       *       *       *       *



That night Kramer lay in bed, tossing from side to side, unable to

sleep. The moon gravity, even artificially increased, was unfamiliar

to him and it made him uncomfortable. A thousand thoughts wandered

loose in his head as he lay, fully awake.



What did it all mean? What was the Professor's plan? Maybe they would

never know. Maybe the ship was gone for good; the Old Man had left

forever, shooting into outer space. They might never find out why he

had done it, what purpose--if any--had been in his mind.



Kramer sat up in bed. He turned on the light and lit a cigarette. His

quarters were small, a metal-lined bunk room, part of the moon station

base.



The Old Man had wanted to talk to him. He had wanted to discuss

things, hold a conversation, but in the hysteria and confusion all

they had been able to think of was getting away. The ship was rushing

off with them, carrying them into outer space. Kramer set his jaw.

Could they be blamed for jumping? They had no idea where they were

being taken, or why. They were helpless, caught in their own ship, and

the pursuit ship standing by waiting to pick them up was their only

chance. Another half hour and it would have been too late.



But what had the Old Man wanted to say? What had he intended to tell

him, in those first confusing moments when the ship around them had

come alive, each metal strut and wire suddenly animate, the body of a

living creature, a vast metal organism?



It was weird, unnerving. He could not forget it, even now. He looked

around the small room uneasily. What did it signify, the coming to

life of metal and plastic? All at once they had found themselves

inside a _living_ creature, in its stomach, like Jonah inside the

whale.



It had been alive, and it had talked to them, talked calmly and

rationally, as it rushed them off, faster and faster into outer space.

The wall speaker and circuit had become the vocal cords and mouth, the

wiring the spinal cord and nerves, the hatches and relays and circuit

breakers the muscles.



They had been helpless, completely helpless. The ship had, in a brief

second, stolen their power away from them and left them defenseless,

practically at its mercy. It was not right; it made him uneasy. All

his life he had controlled machines, bent nature and the forces of

nature to man and man's needs. The human race had slowly evolved until

it was in a position to operate things, run them as it saw fit. Now

all at once it had been plunged back down the ladder again, prostrate

before a Power against which they were children.



Kramer got out of bed. He put on his bathrobe and began to search for

a cigarette. While he was searching, the vidphone rang.



He snapped the vidphone on.



"Yes?"



The face of the immediate monitor appeared. "A call from Terra, Mr.

Kramer. An emergency call."



"Emergency call? For me? Put it through." Kramer came awake, brushing

his hair back out of his eyes. Alarm plucked at him.



From the speaker a strange voice came. "Philip Kramer? Is this

Kramer?"



"Yes. Go on."



"This is General Hospital, New York City, Terra. Mr. Kramer, your wife

is here. She has been critically injured in an accident. Your name was

given to us to call. Is it possible for you to--"



"How badly?" Kramer gripped the vidphone stand. "Is it serious?"



"Yes, it's serious, Mr. Kramer. Are you able to come here? The quicker

you can come the better."



"Yes." Kramer nodded. "I'll come. Thanks."



       *       *       *       *       *



The screen died as the connection was broken. Kramer waited a moment.

Then he tapped the button. The screen relit again. "Yes, sir," the

monitor said.



"Can I get a ship to Terra at once? It's an emergency. My wife--"



"There's no ship leaving the moon for eight hours. You'll have to wait

until the next period."



"Isn't there anything I can do?"



"We can broadcast a general request to all ships passing through this

area. Sometimes cruisers pass by here returning to Terra for repairs."



"Will you broadcast that for me? I'll come down to the field."



"Yes sir. But there may be no ship in the area for awhile. It's a

gamble." The screen died.



Kramer dressed quickly. He put on his coat and hurried to the lift. A

moment later he was running across the general receiving lobby, past

the rows of vacant desks and conference tables. At the door the

sentries stepped aside and he went outside, onto the great concrete

steps.



The face of the moon was in shadow. Below him the field stretched out

in total darkness, a black void, endless, without form. He made his

way carefully down the steps and along the ramp along the side of the

field, to the control tower. A faint row of red lights showed him the

way.



Two soldiers challenged him at the foot of the tower, standing in the

shadows, their guns ready.



"Kramer?"



"Yes." A light was flashed in his face.



"Your call has been sent out already."



"Any luck?" Kramer asked.



"There's a cruiser nearby that has made contact with us. It has an

injured jet and is moving slowly back toward Terra, away from the

line."



"Good." Kramer nodded, a flood of relief rushing through him. He lit a

cigarette and gave one to each of the soldiers. The soldiers lit up.



"Sir," one of them asked, "is it true about the experimental ship?"



"What do you mean?"



"It came to life and ran off?"



"No, not exactly," Kramer said. "It had a new type of control system

instead of the Johnson units. It wasn't properly tested."



"But sir, one of the cruisers that was there got up close to it, and a

buddy of mine says this ship acted funny. He never saw anything like

it. It was like when he was fishing once on Terra, in Washington

State, fishing for bass. The fish were smart, going this way and

that--"



"Here's your cruiser," the other soldier said. "Look!"



An enormous vague shape was setting slowly down onto the field. They

could make nothing out but its row of tiny green blinkers. Kramer

stared at the shape.



"Better hurry, sir," the soldiers said. "They don't stick around here

very long."



"Thanks." Kramer loped across the field, toward the black shape that

rose up above him, extended across the width of the field. The ramp

was down from the side of the cruiser and he caught hold of it. The

ramp rose, and a moment later Kramer was inside the hold of the ship.

The hatch slid shut behind him.



As he made his way up the stairs to the main deck the turbines roared

up from the moon, out into space.



Kramer opened the door to the main deck. He stopped suddenly, staring

around him in surprise. There was nobody in sight. The ship was

deserted.



"Good God," he said. Realization swept over him, numbing him. He sat

down on a bench, his head swimming. "Good God."



The ship roared out into space leaving the moon and Terra farther

behind each moment.



And there was nothing he could do.



       *       *       *       *       *



"So it was you who put the call through," he said at last. "It was you

who called me on the vidphone, not any hospital on Terra. It was all

part of the plan." He looked up and around him. "And Dolores is

really--"



"Your wife is fine," the wall speaker above him said tonelessly. "It

was a fraud. I am sorry to trick you that way, Philip, but it was all

I could think of. Another day and you would have been back on Terra. I

don't want to remain in this area any longer than necessary. They have

been so certain of finding me out in deep space that I have been able

to stay here without too much danger. But even the purloined letter

was found eventually."



Kramer smoked his cigarette nervously. "What are you going to do?

Where are we going?"



"First, I want to talk to you. I have many things to discuss. I was

very disappointed when you left me, along with the others. I had hoped

that you would remain." The dry voice chuckled. "Remember how we used

to talk in the old days, you and I? That was a long time ago."



The ship was gaining speed. It plunged through space at tremendous

speed, rushing through the last of the defense zone and out beyond. A

rush of nausea made Kramer bend over for a moment.



When he straightened up the voice from the wall went on, "I'm sorry to

step it up so quickly, but we are still in danger. Another few moments

and we'll be free."



"How about yuk ships? Aren't they out here?"



"I've already slipped away from several of them. They're quite curious

about me."



"Curious?"



"They sense that I'm different, more like their own organic mines.

They don't like it. I believe they will begin to withdraw from this

area, soon. Apparently they don't want to get involved with me.

They're an odd race, Philip. I would have liked to study them closely,

try to learn something about them. I'm of the opinion that they use no

inert material. All their equipment and instruments are alive, in some

form or other. They don't construct or build at all. The idea of

_making_ is foreign to them. They utilize existing forms. Even their

ships--"



"Where are we going?" Kramer said. "I want to know where you are

taking me."



"Frankly, I'm not certain."



"You're not certain?"



"I haven't worked some details out. There are a few vague spots in my

program, still. But I think that in a short while I'll have them

ironed out."



"What is your program?" Kramer said.



"It's really very simple. But don't you want to come into the control

room and sit? The seats are much more comfortable than that metal

bench."



Kramer went into the control room and sat down at the control board.

Looking at the useless apparatus made him feel strange.



"What's the matter?" the speaker above the board rasped.



       *       *       *       *       *



Kramer gestured helplessly. "I'm--powerless. I can't do anything. And

I don't like it. Do you blame me?"



"No. No, I don't blame you. But you'll get your control back, soon.

Don't worry. This is only a temporary expedient, taking you off this

way. It was something I didn't contemplate. I forgot that orders would

be given out to shoot me on sight."



"It was Gross' idea."



"I don't doubt that. My conception, my plan, came to me as soon as you

began to describe your project, that day at my house. I saw at once

that you were wrong; you people have no understanding of the mind at

all. I realized that the transfer of a human brain from an organic

body to a complex artificial space ship would not involve the loss of

the intellectualization faculty of the mind. When a man thinks, he

_is_.



"When I realized that, I saw the possibility of an age-old dream

becoming real. I was quite elderly when I first met you, Philip. Even

then my life-span had come pretty much to its end. I could look ahead

to nothing but death, and with it the extinction of all my ideas. I

had made no mark on the world, none at all. My students, one by one,

passed from me into the world, to take up jobs in the great Research

Project, the search for better and bigger weapons of war.



"The world has been fighting for a long time, first with itself, then

with the Martians, then with these beings from Proxima Centauri, whom

we know nothing about. The human society has evolved war as a cultural

institution, like the science of astronomy, or mathematics. War is a

part of our lives, a career, a respected vocation. Bright, alert young

men and women move into it, putting their shoulders to the wheel as

they did in the time of Nebuchadnezzar. It has always been so.



"But is it innate in mankind? I don't think so. No social custom is

innate. There were many human groups that did not go to war; the

Eskimos never grasped the idea at all, and the American Indians never

took to it well.



"But these dissenters were wiped out, and a cultural pattern was

established that became the standard for the whole planet. Now it has

become ingrained in us.



"But if someplace along the line some other way of settling problems

had arisen and taken hold, something different than the massing of men

and material to--"



"What's your plan?" Kramer said. "I know the theory. It was part of

one of your lectures."



"Yes, buried in a lecture on plant selection, as I recall. When you

came to me with this proposition I realized that perhaps my conception

could be brought to life, after all. If my theory were right that war

is only a habit, not an instinct, a society built up apart from Terra

with a minimum of cultural roots might develop differently. If it

failed to absorb our outlook, if it could start out on another foot,

it might not arrive at the same point to which we have come: a dead

end, with nothing but greater and greater wars in sight, until nothing

is left but ruin and destruction everywhere.



"Of course, there would have to be a Watcher to guide the experiment,

at first. A crisis would undoubtedly come very quickly, probably in

the second generation. Cain would arise almost at once.



"You see, Kramer, I estimate that if I remain at rest most of the

time, on some small planet or moon, I may be able to keep functioning

for almost a hundred years. That would be time enough, sufficient to

see the direction of the new colony. After that--Well, after that it

would be up to the colony itself.



"Which is just as well, of course. Man must take control eventually,

on his own. One hundred years, and after that they will have control

of their own destiny. Perhaps I am wrong, perhaps war is more than a

habit. Perhaps it is a law of the universe, that things can only

survive as groups by group violence.



"But I'm going ahead and taking the chance that it is only a habit,

that I'm right, that war is something we're so accustomed to that we

don't realize it is a very unnatural thing. Now as to the place! I'm

still a little vague about that. We must find the place, still.



"That's what we're doing now. You and I are going to inspect a few

systems off the beaten path, planets where the trading prospects are

low enough to keep Terran ships away. I know of one planet that might

be a good place. It was reported by the Fairchild Expedition in their

original manual. We may look into that, for a start."



The ship was silent.



       *       *       *       *       *



Kramer sat for a time, staring down at the metal floor under him. The

floor throbbed dully with the motion of the turbines. At last he

looked up.



"You might be right. Maybe our outlook is only a habit." Kramer got to

his feet. "But I wonder if something has occurred to you?"



"What is that?"



"If it's such a deeply ingrained habit, going back thousands of years,

how are you going to get your colonists to make the break, leave Terra

and Terran customs? How about _this_ generation, the first ones, the

people who found the colony? I think you're right that the next

generation would be free of all this, if there were an--" He grinned.

"--An Old Man Above to teach them something else instead."



Kramer looked up at the wall speaker. "How are you going to get the

people to leave Terra and come with you, if by your own theory, this

generation can't be saved, it all has to start with the next?"



The wall speaker was silent. Then it made a sound, the faint dry

chuckle.



"I'm surprised at you, Philip. Settlers can be found. We won't need

many, just a few." The speaker chuckled again. "I'll acquaint you with

my solution."



At the far end of the corridor a door slid open. There was sound, a

hesitant sound. Kramer turned.



"Dolores!"



Dolores Kramer stood uncertainly, looking into the control room. She

blinked in amazement. "Phil! What are you doing here? What's going

on?"



They stared at each other.



"What's happening?" Dolores said. "I received a vidcall that you had

been hurt in a lunar explosion--"



The wall speaker rasped into life. "You see, Philip, that problem is

already solved. We don't really need so many people; even a single

couple might do."



Kramer nodded slowly. "I see," he murmured thickly. "Just one couple.

One man and woman."



"They might make it all right, if there were someone to watch and see

that things went as they should. There will be quite a few things I

can help you with, Philip. Quite a few. We'll get along very well, I

think."



Kramer grinned wryly. "You could even help us name the animals," he

said. "I understand that's the first step."



"I'll be glad to," the toneless, impersonal voice said. "As I recall,

my part will be to bring them to you, one by one. Then you can do the

actual naming."



"I don't understand," Dolores faltered. "What does he mean, Phil?

Naming animals. What kind of animals? Where are we going?"



Kramer walked slowly over to the port and stood staring silently out,

his arms folded. Beyond the ship a myriad fragments of light gleamed,

countless coals glowing in the dark void. Stars, suns, systems.

Endless, without number. A universe of worlds. An infinity of planets,

waiting for them, gleaming and winking from the darkness.



He turned back, away from the port. "Where are we going?" He smiled at

his wife, standing nervous and frightened, her large eyes full of

alarm. "I don't know where we are going," he said. "But somehow that

doesn't seem too important right now.... I'm beginning to see the

Professor's point, it's the result that counts."



And for the first time in many months he put his arm around Dolores.

At first she stiffened, the fright and nervousness still in her eyes.

But then suddenly she relaxed against him and there were tears wetting

her cheeks.



"Phil ... do you really think we can start over again--you and I?"



He kissed her tenderly, then passionately.



And the spaceship shot swiftly through the endless, trackless eternity

of the void....











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Spaceship, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net



















THE CRYSTAL CRYPT



By PHILIP K. DICK





    _Stark terror ruled the Inner-Flight ship on that last Mars-Terra

    run. For the black-clad Leiters were on the prowl ... and the grim

    red planet was not far behind._





"Attention, Inner-Flight ship! Attention! You are ordered to land at the

Control Station on Deimos for inspection. Attention! You are to land at

once!"



The metallic rasp of the speaker echoed through the corridors of the

great ship. The passengers glanced at each other uneasily, murmuring and

peering out the port windows at the small speck below, the dot of rock

that was the Martian checkpoint, Deimos.



"What's up?" an anxious passenger asked one of the pilots, hurrying

through the ship to check the escape lock.



"We have to land. Keep seated." The pilot went on.



"Land? But why?" They all looked at each other. Hovering above the

bulging Inner-Flight ship were three slender Martian pursuit craft,

poised and alert for any emergency. As the Inner-Flight ship prepared to

land the pursuit ships dropped lower, carefully maintaining themselves a

short distance away.



"There's something going on," a woman passenger said nervously. "Lord, I

thought we were finally through with those Martians. Now what?"



"I don't blame them for giving us one last going over," a heavy-set

business man said to his companion. "After all, we're the last ship

leaving Mars for Terra. We're damn lucky they let us go at all."



"You think there really will be war?" A young man said to the girl

sitting in the seat next to him. "Those Martians won't dare fight, not

with our weapons and ability to produce. We could take care of Mars in a

month. It's all talk."



The girl glanced at him. "Don't be so sure. Mars is desperate. They'll

fight tooth and nail. I've been on Mars three years." She shuddered.

"Thank goodness I'm getting away. If--"



"Prepare to land!" the pilot's voice came. The ship began to settle

slowly, dropping down toward the tiny emergency field on the seldom

visited moon. Down, down the ship dropped. There was a grinding sound, a

sickening jolt. Then silence.



"We've landed," the heavy-set business man said. "They better not do

anything to us! Terra will rip them apart if they violate one Space

Article."



"Please keep your seats," the pilot's voice came. "No one is to leave

the ship, according to the Martian authorities. We are to remain here."



A restless stir filled the ship. Some of the passengers began to read

uneasily, others stared out at the deserted field, nervous and on edge,

watching the three Martian pursuit ships land and disgorge groups of

armed men.



The Martian soldiers were crossing the field quickly, moving toward

them, running double time.



This Inner-Flight spaceship was the last passenger vessel to leave Mars

for Terra. All other ships had long since left, returning to safety

before the outbreak of hostilities. The passengers were the very last to

go, the final group of Terrans to leave the grim red planet, business

men, expatriates, tourists, any and all Terrans who had not already gone

home.



"What do you suppose they want?" the young man said to the girl. "It's

hard to figure Martians out, isn't it? First they give the ship

clearance, let us take off, and now they radio us to set down again. By

the way, my name's Thacher, Bob Thacher. Since we're going to be here

awhile--"



[Illustration]



       *       *       *       *       *



The port lock opened. Talking ceased abruptly, as everyone turned. A

black-clad Martian official, a Province Leiter, stood framed against the

bleak sunlight, staring around the ship. Behind him a handful of Martian

soldiers stood waiting, their guns ready.



"This will not take long," the Leiter said, stepping into the ship, the

soldiers following him. "You will be allowed to continue your trip

shortly."



An audible sigh of relief went through the passengers.



"Look at him," the girl whispered to Thacher. "How I hate those black

uniforms!"



"He's just a Provincial Leiter," Thacher said. "Don't worry."



The Leiter stood for a moment, his hands on his hips, looking around at

them without expression. "I have ordered your ship grounded so that an

inspection can be made of all persons aboard," he said. "You Terrans are

the last to leave our planet. Most of you are ordinary and harmless-- I

am not interested in you. I am interested in finding three saboteurs,

three Terrans, two men and a woman, who have committed an incredible act

of destruction and violence. They are said to have fled to this ship."



Murmurs of surprise and indignation broke out on all sides. The Leiter

motioned the soldiers to follow him up the aisle.



"Two hours ago a Martian city was destroyed. Nothing remains, only a

depression in the sand where the city was. The city and all its people

have completely vanished. An entire city destroyed in a second! Mars

will never rest until the saboteurs are captured. And we know they are

aboard this ship."



"It's impossible," the heavy-set business man said. "There aren't any

saboteurs here."



"We'll begin with you," the Leiter said to him, stepping up beside the

man's seat. One of the soldiers passed the Leiter a square metal box.

"This will soon tell us if you're speaking the truth. Stand up. Get on

your feet."



The man rose slowly, flushing. "See here--"



"Are you involved in the destruction of the city? Answer!"



The man swallowed angrily. "I know nothing about any destruction of any

city. And furthermore--"



"He is telling the truth," the metal box said tonelessly.



"Next person." The Leiter moved down the aisle.



A thin, bald-headed man stood up nervously. "No, sir," he said. "I don't

know a thing about it."



"He is telling the truth," the box affirmed.



"Next person! Stand up!"



One person after another stood, answered, and sat down again in relief.

At last there were only a few people left who had not been questioned.

The Leiter paused, studying them intently.



"Only five left. The three must be among you. We have narrowed it down."

His hand moved to his belt. Something flashed, a rod of pale fire. He

raised the rod, pointing it steadily at the five people. "All right, the

first one of you. What do you know about this destruction? Are you

involved with the destruction of our city?"



"No, not at all," the man murmured.



"Yes, he's telling the truth," the box intoned.



"Next!"



"Nothing-- I know nothing. I had nothing to do with it."



"True," the box said.



The ship was silent. Three people remained, a middle-aged man and his

wife and their son, a boy of about twelve. They stood in the corner,

staring white-faced at the Leiter, at the rod in his dark fingers.



"It must be you," the Leiter grated, moving toward them. The Martian

soldiers raised their guns. "It _must_ be you. You there, the boy. What

do you know about the destruction of our city? Answer!"



The boy shook his head. "Nothing," he whispered.



The box was silent for a moment. "He is telling the truth," it said

reluctantly.



"Next!"



"Nothing," the woman muttered. "Nothing."



"The truth."



"Next!"



"I had nothing to do with blowing up your city," the man said. "You're

wasting your time."



"It is the truth," the box said.



For a long time the Leiter stood, toying with his rod. At last he pushed

it back in his belt and signalled the soldiers toward the exit lock.



"You may proceed on your trip," he said. He walked after the soldiers.

At the hatch he stopped, looking back at the passengers, his face grim.

"You may go-- But Mars will not allow her enemies to escape. The three

saboteurs will be caught, I promise you." He rubbed his dark jaw

thoughtfully. "It is strange. I was certain they were on this ship."



Again he looked coldly around at the Terrans.



"Perhaps I was wrong. All right, proceed! But remember: the three will

be caught, even if it takes endless years. Mars will catch them and

punish them! I swear it!"



       *       *       *       *       *



For a long time no one spoke. The ship lumbered through space again, its

jets firing evenly, calmly, moving the passengers toward their own

planet, toward home. Behind them Deimos and the red ball that was Mars

dropped farther and farther away each moment, disappearing and fading

into the distance.



A sigh of relief passed through the passengers. "What a lot of hot air

that was," one grumbled.



"Barbarians!" a woman said.



A few of them stood up, moving out into the aisle, toward the lounge and

the cocktail bar. Beside Thacher the girl got to her feet, pulling her

jacket around her shoulders.



"Pardon me," she said, stepping past him.



"Going to the bar?" Thacher said. "Mind if I come along?"



"I suppose not."



They followed the others into the lounge, walking together up the aisle.

"You know," Thacher said, "I don't even know your name, yet."



"My name is Mara Gordon."



"Mara? That's a nice name. What part of Terra are you from? North

America? New York?"



"I've been in New York," Mara said. "New York is very lovely." She was

slender and pretty, with a cloud of dark hair tumbling down her neck,

against her leather jacket.



They entered the lounge and stood undecided.



"Let's sit at a table," Mara said, looking around at the people at the

bar, mostly men. "Perhaps that table over there."



"But someone's there already," Thacher said. The heavy-set business man

had sat down at the table and deposited his sample case on the floor.

"Do we want to sit with _him_?"



"Oh, it's all right," Mara said, crossing to the table. "May we sit

here?" she said to the man.



The man looked up, half-rising. "It's a pleasure," he murmured. He

studied Thacher intently. "However, a friend of mine will be joining me

in a moment."



"I'm sure there's room enough for us all," Mara said. She seated herself

and Thacher helped her with her chair. He sat down, too, glancing up

suddenly at Mara and the business man. They were looking at each other

almost as if something had passed between them. The man was middle-aged,

with a florid face and tired, grey eyes. His hands were mottled with the

veins showing thickly. At the moment he was tapping nervously.



"My name's Thacher," Thacher said to him, holding out his hand. "Bob

Thacher. Since we're going to be together for a while we might as well

get to know each other."



The man studied him. Slowly his hand came out. "Why not? My name's

Erickson. Ralf Erickson."



"Erickson?" Thacher smiled. "You look like a commercial man, to me." He

nodded toward the sample case on the floor. "Am I right?"



The man named Erickson started to answer, but at that moment there was a

stir. A thin man of about thirty had come up to the table, his eyes

bright, staring down at them warmly. "Well, we're on our way," he said

to Erickson.



"Hello, Mara." He pulled out a chair and sat down quickly, folding his

hands on the table before him. He noticed Thacher and drew back a

little. "Pardon me," he murmured.



"Bob Thacher is my name," Thacher said. "I hope I'm not intruding

here." He glanced around at the three of them, Mara, alert, watching him

intently, heavy-set Erickson, his face blank, and this person. "Say, do

you three know each other?" he asked suddenly.



There was silence.



The robot attendant slid over soundlessly, poised to take their orders.

Erickson roused himself. "Let's see," he murmured. "What will we have?

Mara?"



"Whiskey and water."



"You, Jan?"



The bright slim man smiled. "The same."



"Thacher?"



"Gin and tonic."



"Whiskey and water for me, also," Erickson said. The robot attendant

went off. It returned at once with the drinks, setting them on the table.

Each took his own. "Well," Erickson said, holding his glass up. "To our

mutual success."



       *       *       *       *       *



All drank, Thacher and the three of them, heavy-set Erickson, Mara, her

eyes nervous and alert, Jan, who had just come. Again a look passed

between Mara and Erickson, a look so swift that he would not have caught

it had he not been looking directly at her.



"What line do you represent, Mr. Erickson?" Thacher asked.



Erickson glanced at him, then down at the sample case on the floor. He

grunted. "Well, as you can see, I'm a salesman."



Thacher smiled. "I knew it! You get so you can always spot a salesman

right off by his sample case. A salesman always has to carry something

to show. What are you in, sir?"



Erickson paused. He licked his thick lips, his eyes blank and lidded,

like a toad's. At last he rubbed his mouth with his hand and reached

down, lifting up the sample case. He set it on the table in front of

him.



"Well?" he said. "Perhaps we might even show Mr. Thacher."



They all stared down at the sample case. It seemed to be an ordinary

leather case, with a metal handle and a snap lock. "I'm getting

curious," Thacher said. "What's in there? You're all so tense. Diamonds?

Stolen jewels?"



Jan laughed harshly, mirthlessly. "Erick, put it down. We're not far

enough away, yet."



"Nonsense," Erick rumbled. "We're away, Jan."



"Please," Mara whispered. "Wait, Erick."



"Wait? Why? What for? You're so accustomed to--"



"Erick," Mara said. She nodded toward Thacher. "We don't know him,

Erick. Please!"



"He's a Terran, isn't he?" Erickson said. "All Terrans are together in

these times." He fumbled suddenly at the catch lock on the case. "Yes,

Mr. Thacher. I'm a salesman. We're all salesmen, the three of us."



"Then you do know each other."



"Yes." Erickson nodded. His two companions sat rigidly, staring down.

"Yes, we do. Here, I'll show you our line."



He opened the case. From it he took a letter-knife, a pencil sharpener,

a glass globe paperweight, a box of thumb tacks, a stapler, some clips,

a plastic ashtray, and some things Thacher could not identify. He placed

the objects in a row in front of him on the table top. Then he closed

the sample case.



"I gather you're in office supplies," Thacher said. He touched the

letter-knife with his finger. "Nice quality steel. Looks like Swedish

steel, to me."



Erickson nodded, looking into Thacher's face. "Not really an impressive

business, is it? Office supplies. Ashtrays, paper clips." He smiled.



"Oh--" Thacher shrugged. "Why not? They're a necessity in modern

business. The only thing I wonder--"



"What's that?"



"Well, I wonder how you'd ever find enough customers on Mars to make it

worth your while." He paused, examining the glass paperweight. He lifted

it up, holding it to the light, staring at the scene within until

Erickson took it out of his hand and put it back in the sample case.

"And another thing. If you three know each other, why did you sit apart

when you got on?"



They looked at him quickly.



"And why didn't you speak to each other until we left Deimos?" He leaned

toward Erickson, smiling at him. "Two men and a woman. Three of you.

Sitting apart in the ship. Not speaking, not until the check-station

was past. I find myself thinking over what the Martian said. Three

saboteurs. A woman and two men."



Erickson put the things back in the sample case. He was smiling, but his

face had gone chalk white. Mara stared down, playing with a drop of

water on the edge of her glass. Jan clenched his hands together

nervously, blinking rapidly.



"You three are the ones the Leiter was after," Thacher said softly. "You

are the destroyers, the saboteurs. But their lie detector-- Why didn't

it trap you? How did you get by that? And now you're safe, outside the

check-station." He grinned, staring around at them. "I'll be damned! And

I really thought you were a salesman, Erickson. You really fooled me."



Erickson relaxed a little. "Well, Mr. Thacher, it's in a good cause. I'm

sure you have no love for Mars, either. No Terran does. And I see you're

leaving with the rest of us."



"True," Thacher said. "You must certainly have an interesting account to

give, the three of you." He looked around the table.



"We still have an hour or so of travel. Sometimes it gets dull, this

Mars-Terra run. Nothing to see, nothing to do but sit and drink in the

lounge." He raised his eyes slowly. "Any chance you'd like to spin a

story to keep us awake?"



Jan and Mara looked at Erickson. "Go on," Jan said. "He knows who we

are. Tell him the rest of the story."



"You might as well," Mara said.



Jan let out a sigh suddenly, a sigh of relief. "Let's put the cards on

the table, get this weight off us. I'm tired of sneaking around,

slipping--"



"Sure," Erickson said expansively. "Why not?" He settled back in his

chair, unbuttoning his vest. "Certainly, Mr. Thacher. I'll be glad to

spin you a story. And I'm sure it will be interesting enough to keep you

awake."



       *       *       *       *       *



They ran through the groves of dead trees, leaping across the sun-baked

Martian soil, running silently together. They went up a little rise,

across a narrow ridge. Suddenly Erick stopped, throwing himself down

flat on the ground. The others did the same, pressing themselves against

the soil, gasping for breath.



"Be silent," Erick muttered. He raised himself a little. "No noise.

There'll be Leiters nearby, from now on. We don't dare take any

chances."



Between the three people lying in the grove of dead trees and the City

was a barren, level waste of desert, over a mile of blasted sand. No

trees or bushes marred the smooth, parched surface. Only an occasional

wind, a dry wind eddying and twisting, blew the sand up into little

rills. A faint odor came to them, a bitter smell of heat and sand,

carried by the wind.



Erick pointed. "Look. The City-- There it is."



They stared, still breathing deeply from their race through the trees.

The City was close, closer than they had ever seen it before. Never had

they gotten so close to it in times past. Terrans were never allowed

near the great Martian cities, the centers of Martian life. Even in

ordinary times, when there was no threat of approaching war, the

Martians shrewdly kept all Terrans away from their citadels, partly from

fear, partly from a deep, innate sense of hostility toward the

white-skinned visitors whose commercial ventures had earned them the

respect, and the dislike, of the whole system.



"How does it look to you?" Erick said.



The City was huge, much larger than they had imagined from the drawings

and models they had studied so carefully back in New York, in the War

Ministry Office. Huge it was, huge and stark, black towers rising up

against the sky, incredibly thin columns of ancient metal, columns that

had stood wind and sun for centuries. Around the City was a wall of

stone, red stone, immense bricks that had been lugged there and fitted

into place by slaves of the early Martian dynasties, under the whiplash

of the first great Kings of Mars.



An ancient, sun-baked City, a City set in the middle of a wasted plain,

beyond groves of dead trees, a City seldom seen by Terrans--but a City

studied on maps and charts in every War Office on Terra. A City that

contained, for all its ancient stone and archaic towers, the ruling

group of all Mars, the Council of Senior Leiters, black-clad men who

governed and ruled with an iron hand.



The Senior Leiters, twelve fanatic and devoted men, black priests, but

priests with flashing rods of fire, lie detectors, rocket ships,

intra-space cannon, many more things the Terran Senate could only

conjecture about. The Senior Leiters and their subordinate Province

Leiters-- Erick and the two behind him suppressed a shudder.



"We've got to be careful," Erick said again. "We'll be passing among

them, soon. If they guess who we are, or what we're here for--"



He snapped open the case he carried, glancing inside for a second. Then

he closed it again, grasping the handle firmly. "Let's go," he said. He

stood up slowly. "You two come up beside me. I want to make sure you

look the way you should."



       *       *       *       *       *



Mara and Jan stepped quickly ahead. Erick studied them critically as the

three of them walked slowly down the slope, onto the plain, toward the

towering black spires of the City.



"Jan," Erick said. "Take hold of her hand! Remember, you're going to

marry her; she's your bride. And Martian peasants think a lot of their

brides."



Jan was dressed in the short trousers and coat of the Martian farmer, a

knotted rope tied around his waist, a hat on his head to keep off the

sun. His skin was dark, colored by dye until it was almost bronze.



"You look fine," Erick said to him. He glanced at Mara. Her black hair

was tied in a knot, looped through a hollowed-out yuke bone. Her face

was dark, too, dark and lined with colored ceremonial pigment, green and

orange stripes across her cheeks. Earrings were strung through her ears.

On her feet were tiny slippers of perruh hide, laced around her ankles,

and she wore long translucent Martian trousers with a bright sash tied

around her waist. Between her small breasts a chain of stone beads

rested, good-luck charms for the coming marriage.



"All right," Erick said. He, himself, wore the flowing grey robe of a

Martian priest, dirty robes that were supposed to remain on him all his

life, to be buried around him when he died. "I think we'll get past the

guards. There should be heavy morning traffic on the road."



They walked on, the hard sand crunching under their feet. Against the

horizon they could see specks moving, other persons going toward the

City, farmers and peasants and merchants, bringing their crops and goods

to market.



"See the cart!" Mara exclaimed.



They were nearing a narrow road, two ruts worn into the sand. A Martian

hufa was pulling the cart, its great sides wet with perspiration, its

tongue hanging out. The cart was piled high with bales of cloth, rough

country cloth, hand dipped. A bent farmer urged the hufa on.



"And there." She pointed, smiling.



A group of merchants riding small animals were moving along behind the

cart, Martians in long robes, their faces hidden by sand masks. On each

animal was a pack, carefully tied on with rope. And beyond the

merchants, plodding dully along, were peasants and farmers in an endless

procession, some riding carts or animals, but mostly on foot.



Mara and Jan and Erick joined the line of people, melting in behind the

merchants. No one noticed them; no one looked up or gave any sign. The

march continued as before. Neither Jan nor Mara said anything to each

other. They walked a little behind Erick, who paced with a certain

dignity, a certain bearing becoming his position.



Once he slowed down, pointing up at the sky. "Look," he murmured, in the

Martian hill dialect. "See that?"



Two black dots circled lazily. Martian patrol craft, the military on the

outlook for any sign of unusual activity. War was almost ready to break

out with Terra. Any day, almost any moment.



"We'll be just in time," Erick said. "Tomorrow will be too late. The

last ship will have left Mars."



"I hope nothing stops us," Mara said. "I want to get back home when

we're through."



       *       *       *       *       *



Half an hour passed. They neared the City, the wall growing as they

walked, rising higher and higher until it seemed to blot out the sky

itself. A vast wall, a wall of eternal stone that had felt the wind and

sun for centuries. A group of Martian soldiers were standing at the

entrance, the single passage-gate hewn into the rock, leading to the

City. As each person went through the soldiers examined him, poking his

garments, looking into his load.



Erick tensed. The line had slowed almost to a halt. "It'll be our turn,

soon," he murmured. "Be prepared."



"Let's hope no Leiters come around," Jan said. "The soldiers aren't so

bad."



Mara was staring up at the wall and the towers beyond. Under their feet

the ground trembled, vibrating and shaking. She could see tongues of

flame rising from the towers, from the deep underground factories and

forges of the City. The air was thick and dense with particles of soot.

Mara rubbed her mouth, coughing.



"Here they come," Erick said softly.



The merchants had been examined and allowed to pass through the dark

gate, the entrance through the wall into the City. They and their silent

animals had already disappeared inside. The leader of the group of

soldiers was beckoning impatiently to Erick, waving him on.



"Come along!" he said. "Hurry up there, old man."



Erick advanced slowly, his arms wrapped around his body, looking down at

the ground.



"Who are you and what's your business here?" the soldier demanded, his

hands on his hips, his gun hanging idly at his waist. Most of the

soldiers were lounging lazily, leaning against the wall, some even

squatting in the shade. Flies crawled on the face of one who had fallen

asleep, his gun on the ground beside him.



"My business?" Erick murmured. "I am a village priest."



"Why do you want to enter the City?"



"I must bring these two people before the magistrate to marry them." He

indicated Mara and Jan, standing a little behind him. "That is the Law

the Leiters have made."



The soldier laughed. He circled around Erick. "What do you have in that

bag you carry?"



"Laundry. We stay the night."



"What village are you from?"



"Kranos."



"Kranos?" The soldier looked to a companion. "Ever heard of Kranos?"



"A backward pig sty. I saw it once on a hunting trip."



The leader of the soldiers nodded to Jan and Mara. The two of them

advanced, their hands clasped, standing close together. One of the

soldiers put his hand on Mara's bare shoulder, turning her around.



"Nice little wife you're getting," he said. "Good and firm-looking." He

winked, grinning lewdly.



Jan glanced at him in sullen resentment. The soldiers guffawed. "All

right," the leader said to Erick. "You people can pass."



Erick took a small purse from his robes and gave the soldier a coin.

Then the three of them went into the dark tunnel that was the entrance,

passing through the wall of stone, into the City beyond.



They were within the City!



"Now," Erick whispered. "Hurry."



Around them the City roared and cracked, the sound of a thousand vents

and machines, shaking the stones under their feet. Erick led Mara and

Jan into a corner, by a row of brick warehouses. People were everywhere,

hurrying back and forth, shouting above the din, merchants, peddlers,

soldiers, street women. Erick bent down and opened the case he carried.

From the case he quickly took three small coils of fine metal, intricate

meshed wires and vanes worked together into a small cone. Jan took one

and Mara took one. Erick put the remaining cone into his robe and

snapped the case shut again.



"Now remember, the coils must be buried in such a way that the line runs

through the center of the City. We must trisect the main section, where

the largest concentration of buildings is. Remember the maps! Watch the

alleys and streets carefully. Talk to no one if you can help it. Each of

you has enough Martian money to buy your way out of trouble. Watch

especially for cut-purses, and for heaven's sake, don't get lost."



       *       *       *       *       *



Erick broke off. Two black-clad Leiters were coming along the inside of

the wall, strolling together with their hands behind their backs. They

noticed the three who stood in the corner by the warehouses and stopped.



"Go," Erick muttered. "And be back here at sundown." He smiled grimly.

"Or never come back."



Each went off a different way, walking quickly without looking back. The

Leiters watched them go. "The little bride was quite lovely," one

Leiter said. "Those hill people have the stamp of nobility in their

blood, from the old times."



"A very lucky young peasant to possess her," the other said. They went

on. Erick looked after them, still smiling a little. Then he joined the

surging mass of people that milled eternally through the streets of the

City.



At dusk they met outside the gate. The sun was soon to set, and the air

had turned thin and frigid. It cut through their clothing like knives.



Mara huddled against Jan, trembling and rubbing her bare arms.



"Well?" Erick said. "Did you both succeed?"



Around them peasants and merchants were pouring from the entrance,

leaving the City to return to their farms and villages, starting the

long trip back across the plain toward the hills beyond. None of them

noticed the shivering girl and the young man and the old priest standing

by the wall.



"Mine's in place," Jan said. "On the other side of the City, on the

extreme edge. Buried by a well."



"Mine's in the industrial section," Mara whispered, her teeth

chattering. "Jan, give me something to put over me! I'm freezing."



"Good," Erick said. "Then the three coils should trisect dead center, if

the models were correct." He looked up at the darkening sky. Already,

stars were beginning to show. Two dots, the evening patrol, moved slowly

toward the horizon. "Let's hurry. It won't be long."



They joined the line of Martians moving along the road, away from the

City. Behind them the City was losing itself in the sombre tones of

night, its black spires disappearing into darkness.



They walked silently with the country people until the flat ridge of

dead trees became visible on the horizon. Then they left the road and

turned off, walking toward the trees.



"Almost time!" Erick said. He increased his pace, looking back at Jan

and Mara impatiently.



"Come on!"



They hurried, making their way through the twilight, stumbling over

rocks and dead branches, up the side of the ridge. At the top Erick

halted, standing with his hands on his hips, looking back.



"See," he murmured. "The City. The last time we'll ever see it this

way."



"Can I sit down?" Mara said. "My feet hurt me."



Jan pulled at Erick's sleeve. "Hurry, Erick! Not much time left." He

laughed nervously. "If everything goes right we'll be able to look at

it--forever."



"But not like this," Erick murmured. He squatted down, snapping his case

open. He took some tubes and wiring out and assembled them together on

the ground, at the peak of the ridge. A small pyramid of wire and

plastic grew, shaped by his expert hands.



At last he grunted, standing up. "All right."



"Is it pointed directly at the City?" Mara asked anxiously, looking down

at the pyramid.



Erick nodded. "Yes, it's placed according--" He stopped, suddenly

stiffening. "Get back! It's time! _Hurry!_"



Jan ran, down the far side of the slope, away from the City, pulling

Mara with him. Erick came quickly after, still looking back at the

distant spires, almost lost in the night sky.



"Down."



Jan sprawled out, Mara beside him, her trembling body pressed against

his. Erick settled down into the sand and dead branches, still trying to

see. "I want to see it," he murmured. "A miracle. I want to see--"



A flash, a blinding burst of violet light, lit up the sky. Erick clapped

his hands over his eyes. The flash whitened, growing larger, expanding.

Suddenly there was a roar, and a furious hot wind rushed past him,

throwing him on his face in the sand. The hot dry wind licked and seared

at them, crackling the bits of branches into flame. Mara and Jan shut

their eyes, pressed tightly together.



"God--" Erick muttered.



The storm passed. They opened their eyes slowly. The sky was still alive

with fire, a drifting cloud of sparks that was beginning to dissipate

with the night wind. Erick stood up unsteadily, helping Jan and Mara to

their feet. The three of them stood, staring silently across the dark

waste, the black plain, none of them speaking.



The City was gone.



At last Erick turned away. "That part's done," he said. "Now the rest!

Give me a hand, Jan. There'll be a thousand patrol ships around here in

a minute."



"I see one already," Mara said, pointing up. A spot winked in the sky, a

rapidly moving spot. "They're coming, Erick." There was a throb of chill

fear in her voice.



"I know." Erick and Jan squatted on the ground around the pyramid of

tubes and plastic, pulling the pyramid apart. The pyramid was fused,

fused together like molten glass. Erick tore the pieces away with

trembling fingers. From the remains of the pyramid he pulled something

forth, something he held up high, trying to make it out in the darkness.

Jan and Mara came close to see, both staring up intently, almost without

breathing.



"There it is," Erick said. "There!"



       *       *       *       *       *



In his hand was a globe, a small transparent globe of glass. Within the

glass something moved, something minute and fragile, spires almost too

small to be seen, microscopic, a complex web swimming within the hollow

glass globe. A web of spires. A City.



Erick put the globe into the case and snapped it shut. "Let's go," he

said. They began to lope back through the trees, back the way they had

come before. "We'll change in the car," he said as they ran. "I think we

should keep these clothes on until we're actually inside the car. We

still might encounter someone."



"I'll be glad to get my own clothing on again," Jan said. "I feel funny

in these little pants."



"How do you think I feel?" Mara gasped. "I'm freezing in this, what

there is of it."



"All young Martian brides dress that way," Erick said. He clutched the

case tightly as they ran. "I think it looks fine."



"Thank you," Mara said, "but it is cold."



"What do you suppose they'll think?" Jan asked. "They'll assume the City

was destroyed, won't they? That's certain."



"Yes," Erick said. "They'll be sure it was blown up. We can count on

that. And it will be damn important to us that they think so!"



"The car should be around here, someplace," Mara said, slowing down.



"No. Farther on," Erick said. "Past that little hill over there. In the

ravine, by the trees. It's so hard to see where we are."



"Shall I light something?" Jan said.



"No. There may be patrols around who--"



He halted abruptly. Jan and Mara stopped beside him. "What--" Mara

began.



A light glimmered. Something stirred in the darkness. There was a sound.



"Quick!" Erick rasped. He dropped, throwing the case far away from him,

into the bushes. He straightened up tensely.



A figure loomed up, moving through the darkness, and behind it came more

figures, men, soldiers in uniform. The light flashed up brightly,

blinding them. Erick closed his eyes. The light left him, touching Mara

and Jan, standing silently together, clasping hands. Then it flicked

down to the ground and around in a circle.



A Leiter stepped forward, a tall figure in black, with his soldiers

close behind him, their guns ready. "You three," the Leiter said. "Who

are you? Don't move. Stand where you are."



He came up to Erick, peering at him intently, his hard Martian face

without expression. He went all around Erick, examining his robes, his

sleeves.



"Please--" Erick began in a quavering voice, but the Leiter cut him off.



"I'll do the talking. Who are you three? What are you doing here? Speak

up."



"We--we are going back to our village," Erick muttered, staring down,

his hands folded. "We were in the City, and now we are going home."



One of the soldiers spoke into a mouthpiece. He clicked it off and put

it away.



"Come with me," the Leiter said. "We're taking you in. Hurry along."



"In? Back to the City?"



One of the soldiers laughed. "The City is gone," he said. "All that's

left of it you can put in the palm of your hand."



"But what happened?" Mara said.



"No one knows. Come on, hurry it up!"



There was a sound. A soldier came quickly out of the darkness. "A Senior

Leiter," he said. "Coming this way." He disappeared again.



       *       *       *       *       *



"A Senior Leiter." The soldiers stood waiting, standing at a respectful

attention. A moment later the Senior Leiter stepped into the light, a

black-clad old man, his ancient face thin and hard, like a bird's, eyes

bright and alert. He looked from Erick to Jan.



"Who are these people?" he demanded.



"Villagers going back home."



"No, they're not. They don't stand like villagers. Villagers slump--diet,

poor food. These people are not villagers. I myself came from the hills,

and I know."



He stepped close to Erick, looking keenly into his face. "Who are you?

Look at his chin--he never shaved with a sharpened stone! Something is

wrong here."



In his hand a rod of pale fire flashed. "The City is gone, and with it

at least half the Leiter Council. It is very strange, a flash, then

heat, and a wind. But it was not fission. I am puzzled. All at once the

City has vanished. Nothing is left but a depression in the sand."



"We'll take them in," the other Leiter said. "Soldiers, surround them.

Make certain that--"



"Run!" Erick cried. He struck out, knocking the rod from the Senior

Leiter's hand. They were all running, soldiers shouting, flashing their

lights, stumbling against each other in the darkness. Erick dropped to

his knees, groping frantically in the bushes. His fingers closed over

the handle of the case and he leaped up. In Terran he shouted to Mara

and Jan.



"Hurry! To the car! Run!" He set off, down the slope, stumbling through

the darkness. He could hear soldiers behind him, soldiers running and

falling. A body collided against him and he struck out. Someplace behind

him there was a hiss, and a section of the slope went up in flames. The

Leiter's rod--



"Erick," Mara cried from the darkness. He ran toward her. Suddenly he

slipped, falling on a stone. Confusion and firing. The sound of excited

voices.



"Erick, is that you?" Jan caught hold of him, helping him up. "The car.

It's over here. Where's Mara?"



"I'm here," Mara's voice came. "Over here, by the car."



A light flashed. A tree went up in a puff of fire, and Erick felt the

singe of the heat against his face. He and Jan made their way toward the

girl. Mara's hand caught his in the darkness.



"Now the car," Erick said. "If they haven't got to it." He slid down the

slope into the ravine, fumbling in the darkness, reaching and holding

onto the handle of the case. Reaching, reaching--



He touched something cold and smooth. Metal, a metal door handle. Relief

flooded through him. "I've found it! Jan, get inside. Mara, come on." He

pushed Jan past him, into the car. Mara slipped in after Jan, her small

agile body crowding in beside him.



"Stop!" a voice shouted from above. "There's no use hiding in that

ravine. We'll get you! Come up and--"



The sound of voices was drowned out by the roar of the car's motor. A

moment later they shot into the darkness, the car rising into the air.

Treetops broke and cracked under them as Erick turned the car from side

to side, avoiding the groping shafts of pale light from below, the last

furious thrusts from the two Leiters and their soldiers.



Then they were away, above the trees, high in the air, gaining speed

each moment, leaving the knot of Martians far behind.



"Toward Marsport," Jan said to Erick. "Right?"



Erick nodded. "Yes. We'll land outside the field, in the hills. We can

change back to our regular clothing there, our commercial clothing. Damn

it--we'll be lucky if we can get there in time for the ship."



"The last ship," Mara whispered, her chest rising and falling. "What if

we don't get there in time?"



Erick looked down at the leather case in his lap. "We'll have to get

there," he murmured. "We must!"



       *       *       *       *       *



For a long time there was silence. Thacher stared at Erickson. The older

man was leaning back in his chair, sipping a little of his drink. Mara

and Jan were silent.



"So you didn't destroy the City," Thacher said. "You didn't destroy it

at all. You shrank it down and put it in a glass globe, in a

paperweight. And now you're salesmen again, with a sample case of office

supplies!"



Erickson smiled. He opened the briefcase and reaching into it he brought

out the glass globe paperweight. He held it up, looking into it. "Yes,

we stole the City from the Martians. That's how we got by the lie

detector. It was true that we knew nothing about a _destroyed_ City."



"But why?" Thacher said. "Why steal a City? Why not merely bomb it?"



"Ransom," Mara said fervently, gazing into the globe, her dark eyes

bright. "Their biggest City, half of their Council--in Erick's hand!"



"Mars will have to do what Terra asks," Erickson said. "Now Terra will

be able to make her commercial demands felt. Maybe there won't even be a

war. Perhaps Terra will get her way without fighting." Still smiling, he

put the globe back into the briefcase and locked it.



"Quite a story," Thacher said. "What an amazing process, reduction of

size-- A whole City reduced to microscopic dimensions. Amazing. No

wonder you were able to escape. With such daring as that, no one could

hope to stop you."



He looked down at the briefcase on the floor. Underneath them the jets

murmured and vibrated evenly, as the ship moved through space toward

distant Terra.



"We still have quite a way to go," Jan said. "You've heard our story,

Thacher. Why not tell us yours? What sort of line are you in? What's

your business?"



"Yes," Mara said. "What do you do?"



"What do I do?" Thacher said. "Well, if you like, I'll show you." He

reached into his coat and brought out something. Something that flashed

and glinted, something slender. A rod of pale fire.



The three stared at it. Sickened shock settled over them slowly.



Thacher held the rod loosely, calmly, pointing it at Erickson. "We knew

you three were on this ship," he said. "There was no doubt of that. But

we did not know what had become of the City. My theory was that the City

had not been destroyed at all, that something else had happened to it.

Council instruments measured a sudden loss of mass in that area, a

decrease equal to the mass of the City. Somehow the City had been

spirited away, not destroyed. But I could not convince the other Council

Leiters of it. I had to follow you alone."



Thacher turned a little, nodding to the men sitting at the bar. The men

rose at once, coming toward the table.



"A very interesting process you have. Mars will benefit a great deal

from it. Perhaps it will even turn the tide in our favor. When we return

to Marsport I wish to begin work on it at once. And now, if you will

please pass me the briefcase--"









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ January 1954.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.











End of Project Gutenberg's The Crystal Crypt, by Philip Kindred Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















    _Did you ever wonder at the lonely life the bird in a cuckoo clock

    has to lead--that it might possibly love and hate just as easily as

    a real animal of flesh and blood? Philip Dick used that idea for

    this brief fantasy tale. We're sure that after reading it you'll

    give cuckoo clocks more respect._





 beyond

    the

   door



 _by ... Philip K. Dick_





 Larry Thomas bought a cuckoo clock

 for his wife--without knowing the

 price he would have to pay.





That night at the dinner table he brought it out and set it down beside

her plate. Doris stared at it, her hand to her mouth. "My God, what is

it?" She looked up at him, bright-eyed.



"Well, open it."



Doris tore the ribbon and paper from the square package with her sharp

nails, her bosom rising and falling. Larry stood watching her as she

lifted the lid. He lit a cigarette and leaned against the wall.



"A cuckoo clock!" Doris cried. "A real old cuckoo clock like my mother

had." She turned the clock over and over. "Just like my mother had, when

Pete was still alive." Her eyes sparkled with tears.



"It's made in Germany," Larry said. After a moment he added, "Carl got

it for me wholesale. He knows some guy in the clock business. Otherwise

I wouldn't have--" He stopped.



Doris made a funny little sound.



"I mean, otherwise I wouldn't have been able to afford it." He scowled.

"What's the matter with you? You've got your clock, haven't you? Isn't

that what you want?"



Doris sat holding onto the clock, her fingers pressed against the brown

wood.



"Well," Larry said, "what's the matter?"



He watched in amazement as she leaped up and ran from the room, still

clutching the clock. He shook his head. "Never satisfied. They're all

that way. Never get enough."



He sat down at the table and finished his meal.



The cuckoo clock was not very large. It was hand-made, however, and

there were countless frets on it, little indentations and ornaments

scored in the soft wood. Doris sat on the bed drying her eyes and

winding the clock. She set the hands by her wristwatch. Presently she

carefully moved the hands to two minutes of ten. She carried the clock

over to the dresser and propped it up.



Then she sat waiting, her hands twisted together in her lap--waiting for

the cuckoo to come out, for the hour to strike.



As she sat she thought about Larry and what he had said. And what she

had said, too, for that matter--not that she could be blamed for any of

it. After all, she couldn't keep listening to him forever without

defending herself; you had to blow your own trumpet in the world.



She touched her handkerchief to her eyes suddenly. Why did he have to

say that, about getting it wholesale? Why did he have to spoil it all?

If he felt that way he needn't have got it in the first place. She

clenched her fists. He was so mean, so damn mean.



But she was glad of the little clock sitting there ticking to itself,

with its funny grilled edges and the door. Inside the door was the

cuckoo, waiting to come out. Was he listening, his head cocked on one

side, listening to hear the clock strike so that he would know to come

out?



Did he sleep between hours? Well, she would soon see him: she could ask

him. And she would show the clock to Bob. He would love it; Bob loved

old things, even old stamps and buttons. He liked to go with her to the

stores. Of course, it was a little _awkward_, but Larry had been staying

at the office so much, and that helped. If only Larry didn't call up

sometimes to--



There was a whirr. The clock shuddered and all at once the door opened.

The cuckoo came out, sliding swiftly. He paused and looked around

solemnly, scrutinizing her, the room, the furniture.



It was the first time he had seen her, she realized, smiling to herself

in pleasure. She stood up, coming toward him shyly. "Go on," she said.

"I'm waiting."



The cuckoo opened his bill. He whirred and chirped, quickly,

rhythmically. Then, after a moment of contemplation, he retired. And the

door snapped shut.



She was delighted. She clapped her hands and spun in a little circle. He

was marvelous, perfect! And the way he had looked around, studying her,

sizing her up. He liked her; she was certain of it. And she, of course,

loved him at once, completely. He was just what she had hoped would come

out of the little door.



Doris went to the clock. She bent over the little door, her lips close

to the wood. "Do you hear me?" she whispered. "I think you're the most

wonderful cuckoo in the world." She paused, embarrassed. "I hope you'll

like it here."



Then she went downstairs again, slowly, her head high.



Larry and the cuckoo clock really never got along well from the start.

Doris said it was because he didn't wind it right, and it didn't like

being only half-wound all the time. Larry turned the job of winding over

to her; the cuckoo came out every quarter hour and ran the spring down

without remorse, and someone had to be ever after it, winding it up

again.



Doris did her best, but she forgot a good deal of the time. Then Larry

would throw his newspaper down with an elaborate weary motion and stand

up. He would go into the dining-room where the clock was mounted on the

wall over the fireplace. He would take the clock down and making sure

that he had his thumb over the little door, he would wind it up.



"Why do you put your thumb over the door?" Doris asked once.



"You're supposed to."



She raised an eyebrow. "Are you sure? I wonder if it isn't that you

don't want him to come out while you're standing so close."



"Why not?"



"Maybe you're afraid of him."



Larry laughed. He put the clock back on the wall and gingerly removed

his thumb. When Doris wasn't looking he examined his thumb.



There was still a trace of the nick cut out of the soft part of it.

Who--or what--had pecked at him?



       *       *       *       *       *



One Saturday morning, when Larry was down at the office working over

some important special accounts, Bob Chambers came to the front porch

and rang the bell.



Doris was taking a quick shower. She dried herself and slipped into her

robe. When she opened the door Bob stepped inside, grinning.



"Hi," he said, looking around.



"It's all right. Larry's at the office."



"Fine." Bob gazed at her slim legs below the hem of the robe. "How nice

you look today."



She laughed. "Be careful! Maybe I shouldn't let you in after all."



They looked at one another, half amused half frightened. Presently Bob

said, "If you want, I'll--"



"No, for God's sake." She caught hold of his sleeve. "Just get out of

the doorway so I can close it. Mrs. Peters across the street, you

know."



She closed the door. "And I want to show you something," she said. "You

haven't seen it."



He was interested. "An antique? Or what?"



She took his arm, leading him toward the dining-room. "You'll love it,

Bobby." She stopped, wide-eyed. "I hope you will. You must; you must

love it. It means so much to me--_he_ means so much."



"He?" Bob frowned. "Who is he?"



Doris laughed. "You're jealous! Come on." A moment later they stood

before the clock, looking up at it. "He'll come out in a few minutes.

Wait until you see him. I know you two will get along just fine."



"What does Larry think of him?"



"They don't like each other. Sometimes when Larry's here he won't come

out. Larry gets mad if he doesn't come out on time. He says--"



"Says what?"



Doris looked down. "He always says he's been robbed, even if he did get

it wholesale." She brightened. "But I know he won't come out because he

doesn't like Larry. When I'm here alone he comes right out for me, every

fifteen minutes, even though he really only has to come out on the

hour."



She gazed up at the clock. "He comes out for me because he wants to. We

talk; I tell him things. Of course, I'd like to have him upstairs in my

room, but it wouldn't be right."



There was the sound of footsteps on the front porch. They looked at each

other, horrified.



Larry pushed the front door open, grunting. He set his briefcase down

and took off his hat. Then he saw Bob for the first time.



"Chambers. I'll be damned." His eyes narrowed. "What are you doing

here?" He came into the dining-room. Doris drew her robe about her

helplessly, backing away.



"I--" Bob began. "That is, we--" He broke off, glancing at Doris.

Suddenly the clock began to whirr. The cuckoo came rushing out, bursting

into sound. Larry moved toward him.



"Shut that din off," he said. He raised his fist toward the clock. The

cuckoo snapped into silence and retreated. The door closed. "That's

better." Larry studied Doris and Bob, standing mutely together.



"I came over to look at the clock," Bob said. "Doris told me that it's a

rare antique and that--"



"Nuts. I bought it myself." Larry walked up to him. "Get out of here."

He turned to Doris. "You too. And take that damn clock with you."



He paused, rubbing his chin. "No. Leave the clock here. It's mine; I

bought it and paid for it."



In the weeks that followed after Doris left, Larry and the cuckoo clock

got along even worse than before. For one thing, the cuckoo stayed

inside most of the time, sometimes even at twelve o'clock when he should

have been busiest. And if he did come out at all he usually spoke only

once or twice, never the correct number of times. And there was a

sullen, uncooperative note in his voice, a jarring sound that made Larry

uneasy and a little angry.



But he kept the clock wound, because the house was very still and quiet

and it got on his nerves not to hear someone running around, talking and

dropping things. And even the whirring of a clock sounded good to him.



But he didn't like the cuckoo at all. And sometimes he spoke to him.



"Listen," he said late one night to the closed little door. "I know you

can hear me. I ought to give you back to the Germans--back to the Black

Forest." He paced back and forth. "I wonder what they're doing now, the

two of them. That young punk with his books and his antiques. A man

shouldn't be interested in antiques; that's for women."



He set his jaw. "Isn't that right?"



The clock said nothing. Larry walked up in front of it. "Isn't that

right?" he demanded. "Don't you have anything to say?"



He looked at the face of the clock. It was almost eleven, just a few

seconds before the hour. "All right. I'll wait until eleven. Then I want

to hear what you have to say. You've been pretty quiet the last few

weeks since she left."



He grinned wryly. "Maybe you don't like it here since she's gone." He

scowled. "Well, I paid for you, and you're coming out whether you like

it or not. You hear me?"



Eleven o'clock came. Far off, at the end of town, the great tower clock

boomed sleepily to itself. But the little door remained shut. Nothing

moved. The minute hand passed on and the cuckoo did not stir. He was

someplace inside the clock, beyond the door, silent and remote.



"All right, if that's the way you feel," Larry murmured, his lips

twisting. "But it isn't fair. It's your job to come out. We all have to

do things we don't like."



He went unhappily into the kitchen and opened the great gleaming

refrigerator. As he poured himself a drink he thought about the clock.



There was no doubt about it--the cuckoo should come out, Doris or no

Doris. He had always liked her, from the very start. They had got along

well, the two of them. Probably he liked Bob too--probably he had seen

enough of Bob to get to know him. They would be quite happy together,

Bob and Doris and the cuckoo.



Larry finished his drink. He opened the drawer at the sink and took out

the hammer. He carried it carefully into the dining-room. The clock was

ticking gently to itself on the wall.



"Look," he said, waving the hammer. "You know what I have here? You know

what I'm going to do with it? I'm going to start on you--first." He

smiled. "Birds of a feather, that's what you are--the three of you."



The room was silent.



"Are you coming out? Or do I have to come in and get you?"



The clock whirred a little.



"I hear you in there. You've got a lot of talking to do, enough for the

last three weeks. As I figure it, you owe me--"



The door opened. The cuckoo came out fast, straight at him. Larry was

looking down, his brow wrinkled in thought. He glanced up, and the

cuckoo caught him squarely in the eye.



Down he went, hammer and chair and everything, hitting the floor with a

tremendous crash. For a moment the cuckoo paused, its small body poised

rigidly. Then it went back inside its house. The door snapped tight-shut

after it.



The man lay on the floor, stretched out grotesquely, his head bent over

to one side. Nothing moved or stirred. The room was completely silent,

except, of course, for the ticking of the clock.



       *       *       *       *       *



"I see," Doris said, her face tight. Bob put his arm around her,

steadying her.



"Doctor," Bob said, "can I ask you something?"



"Of course," the doctor said.



"Is it very easy to break your neck, falling from so low a chair? It

wasn't very far to fall. I wonder if it might not have been an accident.

Is there any chance it might have been--"



"Suicide?" the doctor rubbed his jaw. "I never heard of anyone

committing suicide that way. It was an accident; I'm positive."



"I don't mean suicide," Bob murmured under his breath, looking up at the

clock on the wall. "I meant _something else_."



But no one heard him.









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1954.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Beyond the Door, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















THE GUN



By PHILIP K. DICK





    _Nothing moved or stirred. Everything was silent, dead. Only the gun

    showed signs of life ... and the trespassers had wrecked that for

    all time. The return journey to pick up the treasure would be a

    cinch ... they smiled._





The Captain peered into the eyepiece of the telescope. He adjusted the

focus quickly.



"It was an atomic fission we saw, all right," he said presently. He

sighed and pushed the eyepiece away. "Any of you who wants to look may

do so. But it's not a pretty sight."



"Let me look," Tance the archeologist said. He bent down to look,

squinting. "Good Lord!" He leaped violently back, knocking against

Dorle, the Chief Navigator.



"Why did we come all this way, then?" Dorle asked, looking around at the

other men. "There's no point even in landing. Let's go back at once."



"Perhaps he's right," the biologist murmured. "But I'd like to look for

myself, if I may." He pushed past Tance and peered into the sight.



He saw a vast expanse, an endless surface of gray, stretching to the

edge of the planet. At first he thought it was water but after a moment

he realized that it was slag, pitted, fused slag, broken only by hills

of rock jutting up at intervals. Nothing moved or stirred. Everything

was silent, dead.



"I see," Fomar said, backing away from the eyepiece. "Well, I won't find

any legumes there." He tried to smile, but his lips stayed unmoved. He

stepped away and stood by himself, staring past the others.



"I wonder what the atmospheric sample will show," Tance said.



"I think I can guess," the Captain answered. "Most of the atmosphere is

poisoned. But didn't we expect all this? I don't see why we're so

surprised. A fission visible as far away as our system must be a

terrible thing."



He strode off down the corridor, dignified and expressionless. They

watched him disappear into the control room.



As the Captain closed the door the young woman turned. "What did the

telescope show? Good or bad?"



"Bad. No life could possibly exist. Atmosphere poisoned, water

vaporized, all the land fused."



"Could they have gone underground?"



The Captain slid back the port window so that the surface of the planet

under them was visible. The two of them stared down, silent and

disturbed. Mile after mile of unbroken ruin stretched out, blackened

slag, pitted and scarred, and occasional heaps of rock.



Suddenly Nasha jumped. "Look! Over there, at the edge. Do you see it?"



They stared. Something rose up, not rock, not an accidental formation.

It was round, a circle of dots, white pellets on the dead skin of the

planet. A city? Buildings of some kind?



"Please turn the ship," Nasha said excitedly. She pushed her dark hair

from her face. "Turn the ship and let's see what it is!"



The ship turned, changing its course. As they came over the white dots

the Captain lowered the ship, dropping it down as much as he dared.

"Piers," he said. "Piers of some sort of stone. Perhaps poured

artificial stone. The remains of a city."



"Oh, dear," Nasha murmured. "How awful." She watched the ruins disappear

behind them. In a half-circle the white squares jutted from the slag,

chipped and cracked, like broken teeth.



"There's nothing alive," the Captain said at last. "I think we'll go

right back; I know most of the crew want to. Get the Government

Receiving Station on the sender and tell them what we found, and that

we--"



[Illustration]



       *       *       *       *       *



He staggered.



The first atomic shell had struck the ship, spinning it around. The

Captain fell to the floor, crashing into the control table. Papers and

instruments rained down on him. As he started to his feet the second

shell struck. The ceiling cracked open, struts and girders twisted and

bent. The ship shuddered, falling suddenly down, then righting itself as

automatic controls took over.



The Captain lay on the floor by the smashed control board. In the corner

Nasha struggled to free herself from the debris.



Outside the men were already sealing the gaping leaks in the side of the

ship, through which the precious air was rushing, dissipating into the

void beyond. "Help me!" Dorle was shouting. "Fire over here, wiring

ignited." Two men came running. Tance watched helplessly, his eyeglasses

broken and bent.



"So there is life here, after all," he said, half to himself. "But how

could--"



"Give us a hand," Fomar said, hurrying past. "Give us a hand, we've got

to land the ship!"



It was night. A few stars glinted above them, winking through the

drifting silt that blew across the surface of the planet.



Dorle peered out, frowning. "What a place to be stuck in." He resumed

his work, hammering the bent metal hull of the ship back into place. He

was wearing a pressure suit; there were still many small leaks, and

radioactive particles from the atmosphere had already found their way

into the ship.



Nasha and Fomar were sitting at the table in the control room, pale and

solemn, studying the inventory lists.



"Low on carbohydrates," Fomar said. "We can break down the stored fats

if we want to, but--"



"I wonder if we could find anything outside." Nasha went to the window.

"How uninviting it looks." She paced back and forth, very slender and

small, her face dark with fatigue. "What do you suppose an exploring

party would find?"



Fomar shrugged. "Not much. Maybe a few weeds growing in cracks here and

there. Nothing we could use. Anything that would adapt to this

environment would be toxic, lethal."



Nasha paused, rubbing her cheek. There was a deep scratch there, still

red and swollen. "Then how do you explain--_it_? According to your

theory the inhabitants must have died in their skins, fried like yams.

But who fired on us? Somebody detected us, made a decision, aimed a

gun."



"And gauged distance," the Captain said feebly from the cot in the

corner. He turned toward them. "That's the part that worries me. The

first shell put us out of commission, the second almost destroyed us.

They were well aimed, perfectly aimed. We're not such an easy target."



"True." Fomar nodded. "Well, perhaps we'll know the answer before we

leave here. What a strange situation! All our reasoning tells us that no

life could exist; the whole planet burned dry, the atmosphere itself

gone, completely poisoned."



"The gun that fired the projectiles survived," Nasha said. "Why not

people?"



"It's not the same. Metal doesn't need air to breathe. Metal doesn't get

leukemia from radioactive particles. Metal doesn't need food and water."



There was silence.



"A paradox," Nasha said. "Anyhow, in the morning I think we should send

out a search party. And meanwhile we should keep on trying to get the

ship in condition for the trip back."



"It'll be days before we can take off," Fomar said. "We should keep

every man working here. We can't afford to send out a party."



Nasha smiled a little. "We'll send you in the first party. Maybe you can

discover--what was it you were so interested in?"



"Legumes. Edible legumes."



"Maybe you can find some of them. Only--"



"Only what?"



"Only watch out. They fired on us once without even knowing who we were

or what we came for. Do you suppose that they fought with each other?

Perhaps they couldn't imagine anyone being friendly, under any

circumstances. What a strange evolutionary trait, inter-species warfare.

Fighting within the race!"



"We'll know in the morning," Fomar said. "Let's get some sleep."



       *       *       *       *       *



The sun came up chill and austere. The three people, two men and a

woman, stepped through the port, dropping down on the hard ground below.



"What a day," Dorle said grumpily. "I said how glad I'd be to walk on

firm ground again, but--"



"Come on," Nasha said. "Up beside me. I want to say something to you.

Will you excuse us, Tance?"



Tance nodded gloomily. Dorle caught up with Nasha. They walked together,

their metal shoes crunching the ground underfoot. Nasha glanced at him.



"Listen. The Captain is dying. No one knows except the two of us. By the

end of the day-period of this planet he'll be dead. The shock did

something to his heart. He was almost sixty, you know."



Dorle nodded. "That's bad. I have a great deal of respect for him. You

will be captain in his place, of course. Since you're vice-captain

now--"



"No. I prefer to see someone else lead, perhaps you or Fomar. I've been

thinking over the situation and it seems to me that I should declare

myself mated to one of you, whichever of you wants to be captain. Then I

could devolve the responsibility."



"Well, I don't want to be captain. Let Fomar do it."



Nasha studied him, tall and blond, striding along beside her in his

pressure suit. "I'm rather partial to you," she said. "We might try it

for a time, at least. But do as you like. Look, we're coming to

something."



They stopped walking, letting Tance catch up. In front of them was some

sort of a ruined building. Dorle stared around thoughtfully.



"Do you see? This whole place is a natural bowl, a huge valley. See how

the rock formations rise up on all sides, protecting the floor. Maybe

some of the great blast was deflected here."



They wandered around the ruins, picking up rocks and fragments. "I think

this was a farm," Tance said, examining a piece of wood. "This was part

of a tower windmill."



"Really?" Nasha took the stick and turned it over. "Interesting. But

let's go; we don't have much time."



"Look," Dorle said suddenly. "Off there, a long way off. Isn't that

something?" He pointed.



Nasha sucked in her breath. "The white stones."



"What?"



Nasha looked up at Dorle. "The white stones, the great broken teeth. We

saw them, the Captain and I, from the control room." She touched Dorle's

arm gently. "That's where they fired from. I didn't think we had landed

so close."



"What is it?" Tance said, coming up to them. "I'm almost blind without

my glasses. What do you see?"



"The city. Where they fired from."



"Oh." All three of them stood together. "Well, let's go," Tance said.

"There's no telling what we'll find there." Dorle frowned at him.



"Wait. We don't know what we would be getting into. They must have

patrols. They probably have seen us already, for that matter."



"They probably have seen the ship itself," Tance said. "They probably

know right now where they can find it, where they can blow it up. So

what difference does it make whether we go closer or not?"



"That's true," Nasha said. "If they really want to get us we haven't a

chance. We have no armaments at all; you know that."



"I have a hand weapon." Dorle nodded. "Well, let's go on, then. I

suppose you're right, Tance."



"But let's stay together," Tance said nervously. "Nasha, you're going

too fast."



Nasha looked back. She laughed. "If we expect to get there by nightfall

we must go fast."



       *       *       *       *       *



They reached the outskirts of the city at about the middle of the

afternoon. The sun, cold and yellow, hung above them in the colorless

sky. Dorle stopped at the top of a ridge overlooking the city.



"Well, there it is. What's left of it."



There was not much left. The huge concrete piers which they had noticed

were not piers at all, but the ruined foundations of buildings. They had

been baked by the searing heat, baked and charred almost to the ground.

Nothing else remained, only this irregular circle of white squares,

perhaps four miles in diameter.



Dorle spat in disgust. "More wasted time. A dead skeleton of a city,

that's all."



"But it was from here that the firing came," Tance murmured. "Don't

forget that."



"And by someone with a good eye and a great deal of experience," Nasha

added. "Let's go."



They walked into the city between the ruined buildings. No one spoke.

They walked in silence, listening to the echo of their footsteps.



"It's macabre," Dorle muttered. "I've seen ruined cities before but they

died of old age, old age and fatigue. This was killed, seared to death.

This city didn't die--it was murdered."



"I wonder what the city was called," Nasha said. She turned aside, going

up the remains of a stairway from one of the foundations. "Do you think

we might find a signpost? Some kind of plaque?"



She peered into the ruins.



"There's nothing there," Dorle said impatiently. "Come on."



"Wait." Nasha bent down, touching a concrete stone. "There's something

inscribed on this."



"What is it?" Tance hurried up. He squatted in the dust, running his

gloved fingers over the surface of the stone. "Letters, all right." He

took a writing stick from the pocket of his pressure suit and copied the

inscription on a bit of paper. Dorle glanced over his shoulder. The

inscription was:



    FRANKLIN APARTMENTS



"That's this city," Nasha said softly. "That was its name."



Tance put the paper in his pocket and they went on. After a time Dorle

said, "Nasha, you know, I think we're being watched. But don't look

around."



The woman stiffened. "Oh? Why do you say that? Did you see something?"



"No. I can feel it, though. Don't you?"



Nasha smiled a little. "I feel nothing, but perhaps I'm more used to

being stared at." She turned her head slightly. "Oh!"



Dorle reached for his hand weapon. "What is it? What do you see?" Tance

had stopped dead in his tracks, his mouth half open.



"The gun," Nasha said. "It's the gun."



"Look at the size of it. The size of the thing." Dorle unfastened his

hand weapon slowly. "That's it, all right."



The gun was huge. Stark and immense it pointed up at the sky, a mass of

steel and glass, set in a huge slab of concrete. Even as they watched

the gun moved on its swivel base, whirring underneath. A slim vane

turned with the wind, a network of rods atop a high pole.



"It's alive," Nasha whispered. "It's listening to us, watching us."



The gun moved again, this time clockwise. It was mounted so that it

could make a full circle. The barrel lowered a trifle, then resumed its

original position.



"But who fires it?" Tance said.



Dorle laughed. "No one. No one fires it."



They stared at him. "What do you mean?"



"It fires itself."



They couldn't believe him. Nasha came close to him, frowning, looking up

at him. "I don't understand. What do you mean, it fires itself?"



"Watch, I'll show you. Don't move." Dorle picked up a rock from the

ground. He hesitated a moment and then tossed the rock high in the air.

The rock passed in front of the gun. Instantly the great barrel moved,

the vanes contracted.



       *       *       *       *       *



The rock fell to the ground. The gun paused, then resumed its calm

swivel, its slow circling.



"You see," Dorle said, "it noticed the rock, as soon as I threw it up in

the air. It's alert to anything that flies or moves above the ground

level. Probably it detected us as soon as we entered the gravitational

field of the planet. It probably had a bead on us from the start. We

don't have a chance. It knows all about the ship. It's just waiting for

us to take off again."



"I understand about the rock," Nasha said, nodding. "The gun noticed it,

but not us, since we're on the ground, not above. It's only designed to

combat objects in the sky. The ship is safe until it takes off again,

then the end will come."



"But what's this gun for?" Tance put in. "There's no one alive here.

Everyone is dead."



"It's a machine," Dorle said. "A machine that was made to do a job. And

it's doing the job. How it survived the blast I don't know. On it goes,

waiting for the enemy. Probably they came by air in some sort of

projectiles."



"The enemy," Nasha said. "Their own race. It is hard to believe that

they really bombed themselves, fired at themselves."



"Well, it's over with. Except right here, where we're standing. This one

gun, still alert, ready to kill. It'll go on until it wears out."



"And by that time we'll be dead," Nasha said bitterly.



"There must have been hundreds of guns like this," Dorle murmured. "They

must have been used to the sight, guns, weapons, uniforms. Probably they

accepted it as a natural thing, part of their lives, like eating and

sleeping. An institution, like the church and the state. Men trained to

fight, to lead armies, a regular profession. Honored, respected."



Tance was walking slowly toward the gun, peering nearsightedly up at it.

"Quite complex, isn't it? All those vanes and tubes. I suppose this is

some sort of a telescopic sight." His gloved hand touched the end of a

long tube.



Instantly the gun shifted, the barrel retracting. It swung--



"Don't move!" Dorle cried. The barrel swung past them as they stood,

rigid and still. For one terrible moment it hesitated over their heads,

clicking and whirring, settling into position. Then the sounds died out

and the gun became silent.



Tance smiled foolishly inside his helmet. "I must have put my finger

over the lens. I'll be more careful." He made his way up onto the

circular slab, stepping gingerly behind the body of the gun. He

disappeared from view.



"Where did he go?" Nasha said irritably. "He'll get us all killed."



"Tance, come back!" Dorle shouted. "What's the matter with you?"



"In a minute." There was a long silence. At last the archeologist

appeared. "I think I've found something. Come up and I'll show you."



"What is it?"



"Dorle, you said the gun was here to keep the enemy off. I think I know

why they wanted to keep the enemy off."



They were puzzled.



"I think I've found what the gun is supposed to guard. Come and give me

a hand."



"All right," Dorle said abruptly. "Let's go." He seized Nasha's hand.

"Come on. Let's see what he's found. I thought something like this might

happen when I saw that the gun was--"



"Like what?" Nasha pulled her hand away. "What are you talking about?

You act as if you knew what he's found."



"I do." Dorle smiled down at her. "Do you remember the legend that all

races have, the myth of the buried treasure, and the dragon, the serpent

that watches it, guards it, keeping everyone away?"



She nodded. "Well?"



Dorle pointed up at the gun.



"That," he said, "is the dragon. Come on."



       *       *       *       *       *



Between the three of them they managed to pull up the steel cover and

lay it to one side. Dorle was wet with perspiration when they finished.



"It isn't worth it," he grunted. He stared into the dark yawning hole.

"Or is it?"



Nasha clicked on her hand lamp, shining the beam down the stairs. The

steps were thick with dust and rubble. At the bottom was a steel door.



"Come on," Tance said excitedly. He started down the stairs. They

watched him reach the door and pull hopefully on it without success.

"Give a hand!"



"All right." They came gingerly after him. Dorle examined the door. It

was bolted shut, locked. There was an inscription on the door but he

could not read it.



"Now what?" Nasha said.



Dorle took out his hand weapon. "Stand back. I can't think of any other

way." He pressed the switch. The bottom of the door glowed red.

Presently it began to crumble. Dorle clicked the weapon off. "I think we

can get through. Let's try."



The door came apart easily. In a few minutes they had carried it away in

pieces and stacked the pieces on the first step. Then they went on,

flashing the light ahead of them.



They were in a vault. Dust lay everywhere, on everything, inches thick.

Wood crates lined the walls, huge boxes and crates, packages and

containers. Tance looked around curiously, his eyes bright.



"What exactly are all these?" he murmured. "Something valuable, I would

think." He picked up a round drum and opened it. A spool fell to the

floor, unwinding a black ribbon. He examined it, holding it up to the

light.



"Look at this!"



They came around him. "Pictures," Nasha said. "Tiny pictures."



"Records of some kind." Tance closed the spool up in the drum again.

"Look, hundreds of drums." He flashed the light around. "And those

crates. Let's open one."



Dorle was already prying at the wood. The wood had turned brittle and

dry. He managed to pull a section away.



It was a picture. A boy in a blue garment, smiling pleasantly, staring

ahead, young and handsome. He seemed almost alive, ready to move toward

them in the light of the hand lamp. It was one of them, one of the

ruined race, the race that had perished.



For a long time they stared at the picture. At last Dorle replaced the

board.



"All these other crates," Nasha said. "More pictures. And these drums.

What are in the boxes?"



"This is their treasure," Tance said, almost to himself. "Here are their

pictures, their records. Probably all their literature is here, their

stories, their myths, their ideas about the universe."



"And their history," Nasha said. "We'll be able to trace their

development and find out what it was that made them become what they

were."



Dorle was wandering around the vault. "Odd," he murmured. "Even at the

end, even after they had begun to fight they still knew, someplace down

inside them, that their real treasure was this, their books and

pictures, their myths. Even after their big cities and buildings and

industries were destroyed they probably hoped to come back and find

this. After everything else was gone."



"When we get back home we can agitate for a mission to come here," Tance

said. "All this can be loaded up and taken back. We'll be leaving

about--"



He stopped.



"Yes," Dorle said dryly. "We'll be leaving about three day-periods from

now. We'll fix the ship, then take off. Soon we'll be home, that is, if

nothing happens. Like being shot down by that--"



"Oh, stop it!" Nasha said impatiently. "Leave him alone. He's right: all

this must be taken back home, sooner or later. We'll have to solve the

problem of the gun. We have no choice."



Dorle nodded. "What's your solution, then? As soon as we leave the

ground we'll be shot down." His face twisted bitterly. "They've guarded

their treasure too well. Instead of being preserved it will lie here

until it rots. It serves them right."



"How?"



"Don't you see? This was the only way they knew, building a gun and

setting it up to shoot anything that came along. They were so certain

that everything was hostile, the enemy, coming to take their possessions

away from them. Well, they can keep them."



Nasha was deep in thought, her mind far away. Suddenly she gasped.

"Dorle," she said. "What's the matter with us? We have no problem. The

gun is no menace at all."



The two men stared at her.



"No menace?" Dorle said. "It's already shot us down once. And as soon as

we take off again--"



"Don't you see?" Nasha began to laugh. "The poor foolish gun, it's

completely harmless. Even I could deal with it alone."



"You?"



Her eyes were flashing. "With a crowbar. With a hammer or a stick of

wood. Let's go back to the ship and load up. Of course we're at its

mercy in the air: that's the way it was made. It can fire into the sky,

shoot down anything that flies. But that's all! Against something on the

ground it has no defenses. Isn't that right?"



Dorle nodded slowly. "The soft underbelly of the dragon. In the legend,

the dragon's armor doesn't cover its stomach." He began to laugh.

"That's right. That's perfectly right."



"Let's go, then," Nasha said. "Let's get back to the ship. We have work

to do here."



       *       *       *       *       *



It was early the next morning when they reached the ship. During the

night the Captain had died, and the crew had ignited his body, according

to custom. They had stood solemnly around it until the last ember died.

As they were going back to their work the woman and the two men

appeared, dirty and tired, still excited.



And presently, from the ship, a line of people came, each carrying

something in his hands. The line marched across the gray slag, the

eternal expanse of fused metal. When they reached the weapon they all

fell on the gun at once, with crowbars, hammers, anything that was heavy

and hard.



The telescopic sights shattered into bits. The wiring was pulled out,

torn to shreds. The delicate gears were smashed, dented.



Finally the warheads themselves were carried off and the firing pins

removed.



The gun was smashed, the great weapon destroyed. The people went down

into the vault and examined the treasure. With its metal-armored

guardian dead there was no danger any longer. They studied the pictures,

the films, the crates of books, the jeweled crowns, the cups, the

statues.



At last, as the sun was dipping into the gray mists that drifted across

the planet they came back up the stairs again. For a moment they stood

around the wrecked gun looking at the unmoving outline of it.



Then they started back to the ship. There was still much work to be

done. The ship had been badly hurt, much had been damaged and lost. The

important thing was to repair it as quickly as possible, to get it into

the air.



With all of them working together it took just five more days to make it

spaceworthy.



       *       *       *       *       *



Nasha stood in the control room, watching the planet fall away behind

them. She folded her arms, sitting down on the edge of the table.



"What are you thinking?" Dorle said.



"I? Nothing."



"Are you sure?"



"I was thinking that there must have been a time when this planet was

quite different, when there was life on it."



"I suppose there was. It's unfortunate that no ships from our system

came this far, but then we had no reason to suspect intelligent life

until we saw the fission glow in the sky."



"And then it was too late."



"Not quite too late. After all, their possessions, their music, books,

their pictures, all of that will survive. We'll take them home and study

them, and they'll change us. We won't be the same afterwards. Their

sculpturing, especially. Did you see the one of the great winged

creature, without a head or arms? Broken off, I suppose. But those

wings-- It looked very old. It will change us a great deal."



"When we come back we won't find the gun waiting for us," Nasha said.

"Next time it won't be there to shoot us down. We can land and take the

treasure, as you call it." She smiled up at Dorle. "You'll lead us back

there, as a good captain should."



"Captain?" Dorle grinned. "Then you've decided."



Nasha shrugged. "Fomar argues with me too much. I think, all in all, I

really prefer you."



"Then let's go," Dorle said. "Let's go back home."



The ship roared up, flying over the ruins of the city. It turned in a

huge arc and then shot off beyond the horizon, heading into outer space.



       *       *       *       *       *



Down below, in the center of the ruined city, a single half-broken

detector vane moved slightly, catching the roar of the ship. The base of

the great gun throbbed painfully, straining to turn. After a moment a

red warning light flashed on down inside its destroyed works.



And a long way off, a hundred miles from the city, another warning light

flashed on, far underground. Automatic relays flew into action. Gears

turned, belts whined. On the ground above a section of metal slag

slipped back. A ramp appeared.



A moment later a small cart rushed to the surface.



The cart turned toward the city. A second cart appeared behind it. It

was loaded with wiring cables. Behind it a third cart came, loaded with

telescopic tube sights. And behind came more carts, some with relays,

some with firing controls, some with tools and parts, screws and bolts,

pins and nuts. The final one contained atomic warheads.



The carts lined up behind the first one, the lead cart. The lead cart

started off, across the frozen ground, bumping calmly along, followed by

the others. Moving toward the city.



To the damaged gun.









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ September 1952.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gun, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















THE GUN



By PHILIP K. DICK





    _Nothing moved or stirred. Everything was silent, dead. Only the gun

    showed signs of life ... and the trespassers had wrecked that for

    all time. The return journey to pick up the treasure would be a

    cinch ... they smiled._





The Captain peered into the eyepiece of the telescope. He adjusted the

focus quickly.



"It was an atomic fission we saw, all right," he said presently. He

sighed and pushed the eyepiece away. "Any of you who wants to look may

do so. But it's not a pretty sight."



"Let me look," Tance the archeologist said. He bent down to look,

squinting. "Good Lord!" He leaped violently back, knocking against

Dorle, the Chief Navigator.



"Why did we come all this way, then?" Dorle asked, looking around at the

other men. "There's no point even in landing. Let's go back at once."



"Perhaps he's right," the biologist murmured. "But I'd like to look for

myself, if I may." He pushed past Tance and peered into the sight.



He saw a vast expanse, an endless surface of gray, stretching to the

edge of the planet. At first he thought it was water but after a moment

he realized that it was slag, pitted, fused slag, broken only by hills

of rock jutting up at intervals. Nothing moved or stirred. Everything

was silent, dead.



"I see," Fomar said, backing away from the eyepiece. "Well, I won't find

any legumes there." He tried to smile, but his lips stayed unmoved. He

stepped away and stood by himself, staring past the others.



"I wonder what the atmospheric sample will show," Tance said.



"I think I can guess," the Captain answered. "Most of the atmosphere is

poisoned. But didn't we expect all this? I don't see why we're so

surprised. A fission visible as far away as our system must be a

terrible thing."



He strode off down the corridor, dignified and expressionless. They

watched him disappear into the control room.



As the Captain closed the door the young woman turned. "What did the

telescope show? Good or bad?"



"Bad. No life could possibly exist. Atmosphere poisoned, water

vaporized, all the land fused."



"Could they have gone underground?"



The Captain slid back the port window so that the surface of the planet

under them was visible. The two of them stared down, silent and

disturbed. Mile after mile of unbroken ruin stretched out, blackened

slag, pitted and scarred, and occasional heaps of rock.



Suddenly Nasha jumped. "Look! Over there, at the edge. Do you see it?"



They stared. Something rose up, not rock, not an accidental formation.

It was round, a circle of dots, white pellets on the dead skin of the

planet. A city? Buildings of some kind?



"Please turn the ship," Nasha said excitedly. She pushed her dark hair

from her face. "Turn the ship and let's see what it is!"



The ship turned, changing its course. As they came over the white dots

the Captain lowered the ship, dropping it down as much as he dared.

"Piers," he said. "Piers of some sort of stone. Perhaps poured

artificial stone. The remains of a city."



"Oh, dear," Nasha murmured. "How awful." She watched the ruins disappear

behind them. In a half-circle the white squares jutted from the slag,

chipped and cracked, like broken teeth.



"There's nothing alive," the Captain said at last. "I think we'll go

right back; I know most of the crew want to. Get the Government

Receiving Station on the sender and tell them what we found, and that

we--"



[Illustration]



       *       *       *       *       *



He staggered.



The first atomic shell had struck the ship, spinning it around. The

Captain fell to the floor, crashing into the control table. Papers and

instruments rained down on him. As he started to his feet the second

shell struck. The ceiling cracked open, struts and girders twisted and

bent. The ship shuddered, falling suddenly down, then righting itself as

automatic controls took over.



The Captain lay on the floor by the smashed control board. In the corner

Nasha struggled to free herself from the debris.



Outside the men were already sealing the gaping leaks in the side of the

ship, through which the precious air was rushing, dissipating into the

void beyond. "Help me!" Dorle was shouting. "Fire over here, wiring

ignited." Two men came running. Tance watched helplessly, his eyeglasses

broken and bent.



"So there is life here, after all," he said, half to himself. "But how

could--"



"Give us a hand," Fomar said, hurrying past. "Give us a hand, we've got

to land the ship!"



It was night. A few stars glinted above them, winking through the

drifting silt that blew across the surface of the planet.



Dorle peered out, frowning. "What a place to be stuck in." He resumed

his work, hammering the bent metal hull of the ship back into place. He

was wearing a pressure suit; there were still many small leaks, and

radioactive particles from the atmosphere had already found their way

into the ship.



Nasha and Fomar were sitting at the table in the control room, pale and

solemn, studying the inventory lists.



"Low on carbohydrates," Fomar said. "We can break down the stored fats

if we want to, but--"



"I wonder if we could find anything outside." Nasha went to the window.

"How uninviting it looks." She paced back and forth, very slender and

small, her face dark with fatigue. "What do you suppose an exploring

party would find?"



Fomar shrugged. "Not much. Maybe a few weeds growing in cracks here and

there. Nothing we could use. Anything that would adapt to this

environment would be toxic, lethal."



Nasha paused, rubbing her cheek. There was a deep scratch there, still

red and swollen. "Then how do you explain--_it_? According to your

theory the inhabitants must have died in their skins, fried like yams.

But who fired on us? Somebody detected us, made a decision, aimed a

gun."



"And gauged distance," the Captain said feebly from the cot in the

corner. He turned toward them. "That's the part that worries me. The

first shell put us out of commission, the second almost destroyed us.

They were well aimed, perfectly aimed. We're not such an easy target."



"True." Fomar nodded. "Well, perhaps we'll know the answer before we

leave here. What a strange situation! All our reasoning tells us that no

life could exist; the whole planet burned dry, the atmosphere itself

gone, completely poisoned."



"The gun that fired the projectiles survived," Nasha said. "Why not

people?"



"It's not the same. Metal doesn't need air to breathe. Metal doesn't get

leukemia from radioactive particles. Metal doesn't need food and water."



There was silence.



"A paradox," Nasha said. "Anyhow, in the morning I think we should send

out a search party. And meanwhile we should keep on trying to get the

ship in condition for the trip back."



"It'll be days before we can take off," Fomar said. "We should keep

every man working here. We can't afford to send out a party."



Nasha smiled a little. "We'll send you in the first party. Maybe you can

discover--what was it you were so interested in?"



"Legumes. Edible legumes."



"Maybe you can find some of them. Only--"



"Only what?"



"Only watch out. They fired on us once without even knowing who we were

or what we came for. Do you suppose that they fought with each other?

Perhaps they couldn't imagine anyone being friendly, under any

circumstances. What a strange evolutionary trait, inter-species warfare.

Fighting within the race!"



"We'll know in the morning," Fomar said. "Let's get some sleep."



       *       *       *       *       *



The sun came up chill and austere. The three people, two men and a

woman, stepped through the port, dropping down on the hard ground below.



"What a day," Dorle said grumpily. "I said how glad I'd be to walk on

firm ground again, but--"



"Come on," Nasha said. "Up beside me. I want to say something to you.

Will you excuse us, Tance?"



Tance nodded gloomily. Dorle caught up with Nasha. They walked together,

their metal shoes crunching the ground underfoot. Nasha glanced at him.



"Listen. The Captain is dying. No one knows except the two of us. By the

end of the day-period of this planet he'll be dead. The shock did

something to his heart. He was almost sixty, you know."



Dorle nodded. "That's bad. I have a great deal of respect for him. You

will be captain in his place, of course. Since you're vice-captain

now--"



"No. I prefer to see someone else lead, perhaps you or Fomar. I've been

thinking over the situation and it seems to me that I should declare

myself mated to one of you, whichever of you wants to be captain. Then I

could devolve the responsibility."



"Well, I don't want to be captain. Let Fomar do it."



Nasha studied him, tall and blond, striding along beside her in his

pressure suit. "I'm rather partial to you," she said. "We might try it

for a time, at least. But do as you like. Look, we're coming to

something."



They stopped walking, letting Tance catch up. In front of them was some

sort of a ruined building. Dorle stared around thoughtfully.



"Do you see? This whole place is a natural bowl, a huge valley. See how

the rock formations rise up on all sides, protecting the floor. Maybe

some of the great blast was deflected here."



They wandered around the ruins, picking up rocks and fragments. "I think

this was a farm," Tance said, examining a piece of wood. "This was part

of a tower windmill."



"Really?" Nasha took the stick and turned it over. "Interesting. But

let's go; we don't have much time."



"Look," Dorle said suddenly. "Off there, a long way off. Isn't that

something?" He pointed.



Nasha sucked in her breath. "The white stones."



"What?"



Nasha looked up at Dorle. "The white stones, the great broken teeth. We

saw them, the Captain and I, from the control room." She touched Dorle's

arm gently. "That's where they fired from. I didn't think we had landed

so close."



"What is it?" Tance said, coming up to them. "I'm almost blind without

my glasses. What do you see?"



"The city. Where they fired from."



"Oh." All three of them stood together. "Well, let's go," Tance said.

"There's no telling what we'll find there." Dorle frowned at him.



"Wait. We don't know what we would be getting into. They must have

patrols. They probably have seen us already, for that matter."



"They probably have seen the ship itself," Tance said. "They probably

know right now where they can find it, where they can blow it up. So

what difference does it make whether we go closer or not?"



"That's true," Nasha said. "If they really want to get us we haven't a

chance. We have no armaments at all; you know that."



"I have a hand weapon." Dorle nodded. "Well, let's go on, then. I

suppose you're right, Tance."



"But let's stay together," Tance said nervously. "Nasha, you're going

too fast."



Nasha looked back. She laughed. "If we expect to get there by nightfall

we must go fast."



       *       *       *       *       *



They reached the outskirts of the city at about the middle of the

afternoon. The sun, cold and yellow, hung above them in the colorless

sky. Dorle stopped at the top of a ridge overlooking the city.



"Well, there it is. What's left of it."



There was not much left. The huge concrete piers which they had noticed

were not piers at all, but the ruined foundations of buildings. They had

been baked by the searing heat, baked and charred almost to the ground.

Nothing else remained, only this irregular circle of white squares,

perhaps four miles in diameter.



Dorle spat in disgust. "More wasted time. A dead skeleton of a city,

that's all."



"But it was from here that the firing came," Tance murmured. "Don't

forget that."



"And by someone with a good eye and a great deal of experience," Nasha

added. "Let's go."



They walked into the city between the ruined buildings. No one spoke.

They walked in silence, listening to the echo of their footsteps.



"It's macabre," Dorle muttered. "I've seen ruined cities before but they

died of old age, old age and fatigue. This was killed, seared to death.

This city didn't die--it was murdered."



"I wonder what the city was called," Nasha said. She turned aside, going

up the remains of a stairway from one of the foundations. "Do you think

we might find a signpost? Some kind of plaque?"



She peered into the ruins.



"There's nothing there," Dorle said impatiently. "Come on."



"Wait." Nasha bent down, touching a concrete stone. "There's something

inscribed on this."



"What is it?" Tance hurried up. He squatted in the dust, running his

gloved fingers over the surface of the stone. "Letters, all right." He

took a writing stick from the pocket of his pressure suit and copied the

inscription on a bit of paper. Dorle glanced over his shoulder. The

inscription was:



    FRANKLIN APARTMENTS



"That's this city," Nasha said softly. "That was its name."



Tance put the paper in his pocket and they went on. After a time Dorle

said, "Nasha, you know, I think we're being watched. But don't look

around."



The woman stiffened. "Oh? Why do you say that? Did you see something?"



"No. I can feel it, though. Don't you?"



Nasha smiled a little. "I feel nothing, but perhaps I'm more used to

being stared at." She turned her head slightly. "Oh!"



Dorle reached for his hand weapon. "What is it? What do you see?" Tance

had stopped dead in his tracks, his mouth half open.



"The gun," Nasha said. "It's the gun."



"Look at the size of it. The size of the thing." Dorle unfastened his

hand weapon slowly. "That's it, all right."



The gun was huge. Stark and immense it pointed up at the sky, a mass of

steel and glass, set in a huge slab of concrete. Even as they watched

the gun moved on its swivel base, whirring underneath. A slim vane

turned with the wind, a network of rods atop a high pole.



"It's alive," Nasha whispered. "It's listening to us, watching us."



The gun moved again, this time clockwise. It was mounted so that it

could make a full circle. The barrel lowered a trifle, then resumed its

original position.



"But who fires it?" Tance said.



Dorle laughed. "No one. No one fires it."



They stared at him. "What do you mean?"



"It fires itself."



They couldn't believe him. Nasha came close to him, frowning, looking up

at him. "I don't understand. What do you mean, it fires itself?"



"Watch, I'll show you. Don't move." Dorle picked up a rock from the

ground. He hesitated a moment and then tossed the rock high in the air.

The rock passed in front of the gun. Instantly the great barrel moved,

the vanes contracted.



       *       *       *       *       *



The rock fell to the ground. The gun paused, then resumed its calm

swivel, its slow circling.



"You see," Dorle said, "it noticed the rock, as soon as I threw it up in

the air. It's alert to anything that flies or moves above the ground

level. Probably it detected us as soon as we entered the gravitational

field of the planet. It probably had a bead on us from the start. We

don't have a chance. It knows all about the ship. It's just waiting for

us to take off again."



"I understand about the rock," Nasha said, nodding. "The gun noticed it,

but not us, since we're on the ground, not above. It's only designed to

combat objects in the sky. The ship is safe until it takes off again,

then the end will come."



"But what's this gun for?" Tance put in. "There's no one alive here.

Everyone is dead."



"It's a machine," Dorle said. "A machine that was made to do a job. And

it's doing the job. How it survived the blast I don't know. On it goes,

waiting for the enemy. Probably they came by air in some sort of

projectiles."



"The enemy," Nasha said. "Their own race. It is hard to believe that

they really bombed themselves, fired at themselves."



"Well, it's over with. Except right here, where we're standing. This one

gun, still alert, ready to kill. It'll go on until it wears out."



"And by that time we'll be dead," Nasha said bitterly.



"There must have been hundreds of guns like this," Dorle murmured. "They

must have been used to the sight, guns, weapons, uniforms. Probably they

accepted it as a natural thing, part of their lives, like eating and

sleeping. An institution, like the church and the state. Men trained to

fight, to lead armies, a regular profession. Honored, respected."



Tance was walking slowly toward the gun, peering nearsightedly up at it.

"Quite complex, isn't it? All those vanes and tubes. I suppose this is

some sort of a telescopic sight." His gloved hand touched the end of a

long tube.



Instantly the gun shifted, the barrel retracting. It swung--



"Don't move!" Dorle cried. The barrel swung past them as they stood,

rigid and still. For one terrible moment it hesitated over their heads,

clicking and whirring, settling into position. Then the sounds died out

and the gun became silent.



Tance smiled foolishly inside his helmet. "I must have put my finger

over the lens. I'll be more careful." He made his way up onto the

circular slab, stepping gingerly behind the body of the gun. He

disappeared from view.



"Where did he go?" Nasha said irritably. "He'll get us all killed."



"Tance, come back!" Dorle shouted. "What's the matter with you?"



"In a minute." There was a long silence. At last the archeologist

appeared. "I think I've found something. Come up and I'll show you."



"What is it?"



"Dorle, you said the gun was here to keep the enemy off. I think I know

why they wanted to keep the enemy off."



They were puzzled.



"I think I've found what the gun is supposed to guard. Come and give me

a hand."



"All right," Dorle said abruptly. "Let's go." He seized Nasha's hand.

"Come on. Let's see what he's found. I thought something like this might

happen when I saw that the gun was--"



"Like what?" Nasha pulled her hand away. "What are you talking about?

You act as if you knew what he's found."



"I do." Dorle smiled down at her. "Do you remember the legend that all

races have, the myth of the buried treasure, and the dragon, the serpent

that watches it, guards it, keeping everyone away?"



She nodded. "Well?"



Dorle pointed up at the gun.



"That," he said, "is the dragon. Come on."



       *       *       *       *       *



Between the three of them they managed to pull up the steel cover and

lay it to one side. Dorle was wet with perspiration when they finished.



"It isn't worth it," he grunted. He stared into the dark yawning hole.

"Or is it?"



Nasha clicked on her hand lamp, shining the beam down the stairs. The

steps were thick with dust and rubble. At the bottom was a steel door.



"Come on," Tance said excitedly. He started down the stairs. They

watched him reach the door and pull hopefully on it without success.

"Give a hand!"



"All right." They came gingerly after him. Dorle examined the door. It

was bolted shut, locked. There was an inscription on the door but he

could not read it.



"Now what?" Nasha said.



Dorle took out his hand weapon. "Stand back. I can't think of any other

way." He pressed the switch. The bottom of the door glowed red.

Presently it began to crumble. Dorle clicked the weapon off. "I think we

can get through. Let's try."



The door came apart easily. In a few minutes they had carried it away in

pieces and stacked the pieces on the first step. Then they went on,

flashing the light ahead of them.



They were in a vault. Dust lay everywhere, on everything, inches thick.

Wood crates lined the walls, huge boxes and crates, packages and

containers. Tance looked around curiously, his eyes bright.



"What exactly are all these?" he murmured. "Something valuable, I would

think." He picked up a round drum and opened it. A spool fell to the

floor, unwinding a black ribbon. He examined it, holding it up to the

light.



"Look at this!"



They came around him. "Pictures," Nasha said. "Tiny pictures."



"Records of some kind." Tance closed the spool up in the drum again.

"Look, hundreds of drums." He flashed the light around. "And those

crates. Let's open one."



Dorle was already prying at the wood. The wood had turned brittle and

dry. He managed to pull a section away.



It was a picture. A boy in a blue garment, smiling pleasantly, staring

ahead, young and handsome. He seemed almost alive, ready to move toward

them in the light of the hand lamp. It was one of them, one of the

ruined race, the race that had perished.



For a long time they stared at the picture. At last Dorle replaced the

board.



"All these other crates," Nasha said. "More pictures. And these drums.

What are in the boxes?"



"This is their treasure," Tance said, almost to himself. "Here are their

pictures, their records. Probably all their literature is here, their

stories, their myths, their ideas about the universe."



"And their history," Nasha said. "We'll be able to trace their

development and find out what it was that made them become what they

were."



Dorle was wandering around the vault. "Odd," he murmured. "Even at the

end, even after they had begun to fight they still knew, someplace down

inside them, that their real treasure was this, their books and

pictures, their myths. Even after their big cities and buildings and

industries were destroyed they probably hoped to come back and find

this. After everything else was gone."



"When we get back home we can agitate for a mission to come here," Tance

said. "All this can be loaded up and taken back. We'll be leaving

about--"



He stopped.



"Yes," Dorle said dryly. "We'll be leaving about three day-periods from

now. We'll fix the ship, then take off. Soon we'll be home, that is, if

nothing happens. Like being shot down by that--"



"Oh, stop it!" Nasha said impatiently. "Leave him alone. He's right: all

this must be taken back home, sooner or later. We'll have to solve the

problem of the gun. We have no choice."



Dorle nodded. "What's your solution, then? As soon as we leave the

ground we'll be shot down." His face twisted bitterly. "They've guarded

their treasure too well. Instead of being preserved it will lie here

until it rots. It serves them right."



"How?"



"Don't you see? This was the only way they knew, building a gun and

setting it up to shoot anything that came along. They were so certain

that everything was hostile, the enemy, coming to take their possessions

away from them. Well, they can keep them."



Nasha was deep in thought, her mind far away. Suddenly she gasped.

"Dorle," she said. "What's the matter with us? We have no problem. The

gun is no menace at all."



The two men stared at her.



"No menace?" Dorle said. "It's already shot us down once. And as soon as

we take off again--"



"Don't you see?" Nasha began to laugh. "The poor foolish gun, it's

completely harmless. Even I could deal with it alone."



"You?"



Her eyes were flashing. "With a crowbar. With a hammer or a stick of

wood. Let's go back to the ship and load up. Of course we're at its

mercy in the air: that's the way it was made. It can fire into the sky,

shoot down anything that flies. But that's all! Against something on the

ground it has no defenses. Isn't that right?"



Dorle nodded slowly. "The soft underbelly of the dragon. In the legend,

the dragon's armor doesn't cover its stomach." He began to laugh.

"That's right. That's perfectly right."



"Let's go, then," Nasha said. "Let's get back to the ship. We have work

to do here."



       *       *       *       *       *



It was early the next morning when they reached the ship. During the

night the Captain had died, and the crew had ignited his body, according

to custom. They had stood solemnly around it until the last ember died.

As they were going back to their work the woman and the two men

appeared, dirty and tired, still excited.



And presently, from the ship, a line of people came, each carrying

something in his hands. The line marched across the gray slag, the

eternal expanse of fused metal. When they reached the weapon they all

fell on the gun at once, with crowbars, hammers, anything that was heavy

and hard.



The telescopic sights shattered into bits. The wiring was pulled out,

torn to shreds. The delicate gears were smashed, dented.



Finally the warheads themselves were carried off and the firing pins

removed.



The gun was smashed, the great weapon destroyed. The people went down

into the vault and examined the treasure. With its metal-armored

guardian dead there was no danger any longer. They studied the pictures,

the films, the crates of books, the jeweled crowns, the cups, the

statues.



At last, as the sun was dipping into the gray mists that drifted across

the planet they came back up the stairs again. For a moment they stood

around the wrecked gun looking at the unmoving outline of it.



Then they started back to the ship. There was still much work to be

done. The ship had been badly hurt, much had been damaged and lost. The

important thing was to repair it as quickly as possible, to get it into

the air.



With all of them working together it took just five more days to make it

spaceworthy.



       *       *       *       *       *



Nasha stood in the control room, watching the planet fall away behind

them. She folded her arms, sitting down on the edge of the table.



"What are you thinking?" Dorle said.



"I? Nothing."



"Are you sure?"



"I was thinking that there must have been a time when this planet was

quite different, when there was life on it."



"I suppose there was. It's unfortunate that no ships from our system

came this far, but then we had no reason to suspect intelligent life

until we saw the fission glow in the sky."



"And then it was too late."



"Not quite too late. After all, their possessions, their music, books,

their pictures, all of that will survive. We'll take them home and study

them, and they'll change us. We won't be the same afterwards. Their

sculpturing, especially. Did you see the one of the great winged

creature, without a head or arms? Broken off, I suppose. But those

wings-- It looked very old. It will change us a great deal."



"When we come back we won't find the gun waiting for us," Nasha said.

"Next time it won't be there to shoot us down. We can land and take the

treasure, as you call it." She smiled up at Dorle. "You'll lead us back

there, as a good captain should."



"Captain?" Dorle grinned. "Then you've decided."



Nasha shrugged. "Fomar argues with me too much. I think, all in all, I

really prefer you."



"Then let's go," Dorle said. "Let's go back home."



The ship roared up, flying over the ruins of the city. It turned in a

huge arc and then shot off beyond the horizon, heading into outer space.



       *       *       *       *       *



Down below, in the center of the ruined city, a single half-broken

detector vane moved slightly, catching the roar of the ship. The base of

the great gun throbbed painfully, straining to turn. After a moment a

red warning light flashed on down inside its destroyed works.



And a long way off, a hundred miles from the city, another warning light

flashed on, far underground. Automatic relays flew into action. Gears

turned, belts whined. On the ground above a section of metal slag

slipped back. A ramp appeared.



A moment later a small cart rushed to the surface.



The cart turned toward the city. A second cart appeared behind it. It

was loaded with wiring cables. Behind it a third cart came, loaded with

telescopic tube sights. And behind came more carts, some with relays,

some with firing controls, some with tools and parts, screws and bolts,

pins and nuts. The final one contained atomic warheads.



The carts lined up behind the first one, the lead cart. The lead cart

started off, across the frozen ground, bumping calmly along, followed by

the others. Moving toward the city.



To the damaged gun.









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ September 1952.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gun, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















 _Conger agreed to kill a stranger he had

 never seen. But he would make no mistakes

 because he had the stranger's skull under

 his arm._





        THE

       SKULL



 By Philip K. Dick





"What is this opportunity?" Conger asked. "Go on. I'm interested."



The room was silent; all faces were fixed on Conger--still in the drab

prison uniform. The Speaker leaned forward slowly.



"Before you went to prison your trading business was paying well--all

illegal--all very profitable. Now you have nothing, except the prospect

of another six years in a cell."



Conger scowled.



"There is a certain situation, very important to this Council, that

requires your peculiar abilities. Also, it is a situation you might find

interesting. You were a hunter, were you not? You've done a great deal

of trapping, hiding in the bushes, waiting at night for the game? I

imagine hunting must be a source of satisfaction to you, the chase, the

stalking--"



Conger sighed. His lips twisted. "All right," he said. "Leave that out.

Get to the point. Who do you want me to kill?"



The Speaker smiled. "All in proper sequence," he said softly.



       *       *       *       *       *



The car slid to a stop. It was night; there was no light anywhere along

the street. Conger looked out. "Where are we? What is this place?"



The hand of the guard pressed into his arm. "Come. Through that door."



Conger stepped down, onto the damp sidewalk. The guard came swiftly

after him, and then the Speaker. Conger took a deep breath of the cold

air. He studied the dim outline of the building rising up before them.



"I know this place. I've seen it before." He squinted, his eyes growing

accustomed to the dark. Suddenly he became alert. "This is--"



"Yes. The First Church." The Speaker walked toward the steps. "We're

expected."



"Expected? _Here?_"



"Yes." The Speaker mounted the stairs. "You know we're not allowed in

their Churches, especially with guns!" He stopped. Two armed soldiers

loomed up ahead, one on each side.



"All right?" The Speaker looked up at them. They nodded. The door of the

Church was open. Conger could see other soldiers inside, standing about,

young soldiers with large eyes, gazing at the ikons and holy images.



"I see," he said.



"It was necessary," the Speaker said. "As you know, we have been

singularly unfortunate in the past in our relations with the First

Church."



"This won't help."



"But it's worth it. You will see."



       *       *       *       *       *



They passed through the hall and into the main chamber where the altar

piece was, and the kneeling places. The Speaker scarcely glanced at the

altar as they passed by. He pushed open a small side door and beckoned

Conger through.



"In here. We have to hurry. The faithful will be flocking in soon."



Conger entered, blinking. They were in a small chamber, low-ceilinged,

with dark panels of old wood. There was a smell of ashes and smoldering

spices in the room. He sniffed. "What's that? The smell."



"Cups on the wall. I don't know." The Speaker crossed impatiently to the

far side. "According to our information, it is hidden here by this--"



Conger looked around the room. He saw books and papers, holy signs and

images. A strange low shiver went through him.



"Does my job involve anyone of the Church? If it does--"



The Speaker turned, astonished. "Can it be that you believe in the

Founder? Is it possible, a hunter, a killer--"



"No. Of course not. All their business about resignation to death,

non-violence--"



"What is it, then?"



Conger shrugged. "I've been taught not to mix with such as these. They

have strange abilities. And you can't reason with them."



The Speaker studied Conger thoughtfully. "You have the wrong idea. It is

no one here that we have in mind. We've found that killing them only

tends to increase their numbers."



"Then why come here? Let's leave."



"No. We came for something important. Something you will need to

identify your man. Without it you won't be able to find him." A trace

of a smile crossed the Speaker's face. "We don't want you to kill the

wrong person. It's too important."



"I don't make mistakes." Conger's chest rose. "Listen, Speaker--"



"This is an unusual situation," the Speaker said. "You see, the person

you are after--the person that we are sending you to find--is known only

by certain objects here. They are the only traces, the only means of

identification. Without them--"



"What are they?"



He came toward the Speaker. The Speaker moved to one side. "Look," he

said. He drew a sliding wall away, showing a dark square hole. "In

there."



Conger squatted down, staring in. He frowned. "A skull! A skeleton!"



"The man you are after has been dead for two centuries," the Speaker

said. "This is all that remains of him. And this is all you have with

which to find him."



For a long time Conger said nothing. He stared down at the bones, dimly

visible in the recess of the wall. How could a man dead centuries be

killed? How could he be stalked, brought down?



Conger was a hunter, a man who had lived as he pleased, where he

pleased. He had kept himself alive by trading, bringing furs and pelts

in from the Provinces on his own ship, riding at high speed, slipping

through the customs line around Earth.



He had hunted in the great mountains of the moon. He had stalked through

empty Martian cities. He had explored--



The Speaker said, "Soldier, take these objects and have them carried to

the car. Don't lose any part of them."



The soldier went into the cupboard, reaching gingerly, squatting on his

heels.



"It is my hope," the Speaker continued softly, to Conger, "that you will

demonstrate your loyalty to us, now. There are always ways for citizens

to restore themselves, to show their devotion to their society. For you

I think this would be a very good chance. I seriously doubt that a

better one will come. And for your efforts there will be quite a

restitution, of course."



The two men looked at each other; Conger, thin, unkempt, the Speaker

immaculate in his uniform.



"I understand you," Conger said. "I mean, I understand this part, about

the chance. But how can a man who has been dead two centuries be--"



"I'll explain later," the Speaker said. "Right now we have to hurry!"

The soldier had gone out with the bones, wrapped in a blanket held

carefully in his arms. The Speaker walked to the door. "Come. They've

already discovered that we've broken in here, and they'll be coming at

any moment."



They hurried down the damp steps to the waiting car. A second later the

driver lifted the car up into the air, above the house-tops.



       *       *       *       *       *



The Speaker settled back in the seat.



"The First Church has an interesting past," he said. "I suppose you are

familiar with it, but I'd like to speak of a few points that are of

relevancy to us.



"It was in the twentieth century that the Movement began--during one of

the periodic wars. The Movement developed rapidly, feeding on the

general sense of futility, the realization that each war was breeding

greater war, with no end in sight. The Movement posed a simple answer to

the problem: Without military preparations--weapons--there could be no

war. And without machinery and complex scientific technocracy there

could be no weapons.



"The Movement preached that you couldn't stop war by planning for it.

They preached that man was losing to his machinery and science, that it

was getting away from him, pushing him into greater and greater wars.

Down with society, they shouted. Down with factories and science! A few

more wars and there wouldn't be much left of the world.



"The Founder was an obscure person from a small town in the American

Middle West. We don't even know his name. All we know is that one day he

appeared, preaching a doctrine of non-violence, non-resistance; no

fighting, no paying taxes for guns, no research except for medicine.

Live out your life quietly, tending your garden, staying out of public

affairs; mind your own business. Be obscure, unknown, poor. Give away

most of your possessions, leave the city. At least that was what

developed from what he told the people."



The car dropped down and landed on a roof.



"The Founder preached this doctrine, or the germ of it; there's no

telling how much the faithful have added themselves. The local

authorities picked him up at once, of course. Apparently they were

convinced that he meant it; he was never released. He was put to death,

and his body buried secretly. It seemed that the cult was finished."



The Speaker smiled. "Unfortunately, some of his disciples reported

seeing him after the date of his death. The rumor spread; he had

conquered death, he was divine. It took hold, grew. And here we are

today, with a First Church, obstructing all social progress, destroying

society, sowing the seeds of anarchy--"



"But the wars," Conger said. "About them?"



"The wars? Well, there were no more wars. It must be acknowledged that

the elimination of war was the direct result of non-violence practiced

on a general scale. But we can take a more objective view of war today.

What was so terrible about it? War had a profound selective value,

perfectly in accord with the teachings of Darwin and Mendel and others.

Without war the mass of useless, incompetent mankind, without training

or intelligence, is permitted to grow and expand unchecked. War acted to

reduce their numbers; like storms and earthquakes and droughts, it was

nature's way of eliminating the unfit.



"Without war the lower elements of mankind have increased all out of

proportion. They threaten the educated few, those with scientific

knowledge and training, the ones equipped to direct society. They have

no regard for science or a scientific society, based on reason. And this

Movement seeks to aid and abet them. Only when scientists are in full

control can the--"



       *       *       *       *       *



He looked at his watch and then kicked the car door open. "I'll tell you

the rest as we walk."



They crossed the dark roof. "Doubtless you now know whom those bones

belonged to, who it is that we are after. He has been dead just two

centuries, now, this ignorant man from the Middle West, this Founder.

The tragedy is that the authorities of the time acted too slowly. They

allowed him to speak, to get his message across. He was allowed to

preach, to start his cult. And once such a thing is under way, there's

no stopping it.



"But what if he had died before he preached? What if none of his

doctrines had ever been spoken? It took only a moment for him to utter

them, that we know. They say he spoke just once, just one time. _Then_

the authorities came, taking him away. He offered no resistance; the

incident was small."



The Speaker turned to Conger.



"Small, but we're reaping the consequences of it today."



They went inside the building. Inside, the soldiers had already laid out

the skeleton on a table. The soldiers stood around it, their young faces

intense.



Conger went over to the table, pushing past them. He bent down, staring

at the bones. "So these are his remains," he murmured. "The Founder. The

Church has hidden them for two centuries."



"Quite so," the Speaker said. "But now we have them. Come along down the

hall."



They went across the room to a door. The Speaker pushed it open.

Technicians looked up. Conger saw machinery, whirring and turning;

benches and retorts. In the center of the room was a gleaming crystal

cage.



The Speaker handed a Slem-gun to Conger. "The important thing to

remember is that the skull must be saved and brought back--for

comparison and proof. Aim low--at the chest."



Conger weighed the gun in his hands. "It feels good," he said. "I know

this gun--that is, I've seen them before, but I never used one."



The Speaker nodded. "You will be instructed on the use of the gun and

the operation of the cage. You will be given all data we have on the

time and location. The exact spot was a place called Hudson's field.

About 1960 in a small community outside Denver, Colorado. And don't

forget--the only means of identification you will have will be the

skull. There are visible characteristics of the front teeth, especially

the left incisor--"



Conger listened absently. He was watching two men in white carefully

wrapping the skull in a plastic bag. They tied it and carried it into

the crystal cage. "And if I should make a mistake?"



"Pick the wrong man? Then find the right one. Don't come back until you

succeed in reaching this Founder. And you can't wait for him to start

speaking; that's what we must avoid! You must act in advance. Take

chances; shoot as soon as you think you've found him. He'll be someone

unusual, probably a stranger in the area. Apparently he wasn't known."



Conger listened dimly.



"Do you think you have it all now?" the Speaker asked.



"Yes. I think so." Conger entered the crystal cage and sat down, placing

his hands on the wheel.



"Good luck," the Speaker said.



"We'll be awaiting the outcome. There's some philosophical doubt as to

whether one can alter the past. This should answer the question once and

for all."



Conger fingered the controls of the cage.



"By the way," the Speaker said. "Don't try to use this cage for purposes

not anticipated in your job. We have a constant trace on it. If we want

it back, we can get it back. Good luck."



Conger said nothing. The cage was sealed. He raised his finger and

touched the wheel control. He turned the wheel carefully.



He was still staring at the plastic bag when the room outside vanished.



For a long time there was nothing at all. Nothing beyond the crystal

mesh of the cage. Thoughts rushed through Conger's mind, helter-skelter.

How would he know the man? How could he be certain, in advance? What had

he looked like? What was his name? How had he acted, before he spoke?

Would he be an ordinary person, or some strange outlandish crank?



Conger picked up the Slem-gun and held it against his cheek. The metal

of the gun was cool and smooth. He practiced moving the sight. It was a

beautiful gun, the kind of gun he could fall in love with. If he had

owned such a gun in the Martian desert--on the long nights when he had

lain, cramped and numbed with cold, waiting for things that moved

through the darkness--



He put the gun down and adjusted the meter readings of the cage. The

spiraling mist was beginning to condense and settle. All at once forms

wavered and fluttered around him.



Colors, sounds, movements filtered through the crystal wire. He clamped

the controls off and stood up.



       *       *       *       *       *



He was on a ridge overlooking a small town. It was high noon. The air

was crisp and bright. A few automobiles moved along a road. Off in the

distance were some level fields. Conger went to the door and stepped

outside. He sniffed the air. Then he went back into the cage.



He stood before the mirror over the shelf, examining his features. He

had trimmed his beard--they had not got him to cut it off--and his hair

was neat. He was dressed in the clothing of the middle-twentieth

century, the odd collar and coat, the shoes of animal hide. In his

pocket was money of the times. That was important. Nothing more was

needed.



Nothing, except his ability, his special cunning. But he had never used

it in such a way before.



He walked down the road toward the town.



The first things he noticed were the newspapers on the stands. April 5,

1961. He was not too far off. He looked around him. There was a filling

station, a garage, some taverns, and a ten-cent store. Down the street

was a grocery store and some public buildings.



A few minutes later he mounted the stairs of the little public library

and passed through the doors into the warm interior.



The librarian looked up, smiling.



"Good afternoon," she said.



He smiled, not speaking because his words would not be correct; accented

and strange, probably. He went over to a table and sat down by a heap of

magazines. For a moment he glanced through them. Then he was on his feet

again. He crossed the room to a wide rack against the wall. His heart

began to beat heavily.



Newspapers--weeks on end. He took a roll of them over to the table and

began to scan them quickly. The print was odd, the letters strange. Some

of the words were unfamiliar.



He set the papers aside and searched farther. At last he found what he

wanted. He carried the _Cherrywood Gazette_ to the table and opened it

to the first page. He found what he wanted:



    PRISONER HANGS SELF



    An unidentified man, held by the county sheriff's office for

    suspicion of criminal syndicalism, was found dead this morning, by--



He finished the item. It was vague, uninforming. He needed more. He

carried the _Gazette_ back to the racks and then, after a moment's

hesitation, approached the librarian.



"More?" he asked. "More papers. Old ones?"



She frowned. "How old? Which papers?"



"Months old. And--before."



"Of the _Gazette_? This is all we have. What did you want? What are you

looking for? Maybe I can help you."



He was silent.



"You might find older issues at the _Gazette_ office," the woman said,

taking off her glasses. "Why don't you try there? But if you'd tell me,

maybe I could help you--"



He went out.



The _Gazette_ office was down a side street; the sidewalk was broken and

cracked. He went inside. A heater glowed in the corner of the small

office. A heavy-set man stood up and came slowly over to the counter.



"What did you want, mister?" he said.



"Old papers. A month. Or more."



"To buy? You want to buy them?"



"Yes." He held out some of the money he had. The man stared.



"Sure," he said. "Sure. Wait a minute." He went quickly out of the room.

When he came back he was staggering under the weight of his armload, his

face red. "Here are some," he grunted. "Took what I could find. Covers

the whole year. And if you want more--"



Conger carried the papers outside. He sat down by the road and began to

go through them.



       *       *       *       *       *



What he wanted was four months back, in December. It was a tiny item, so

small that he almost missed it. His hands trembled as he scanned it,

using the small dictionary for some of the archaic terms.



    MAN ARRESTED FOR UNLICENSED DEMONSTRATION



    An unidentified man who refused to give his name was picked up in

    Cooper Creek by special agents of the sheriff's office, according to

    Sheriff Duff. It was said the man was recently noticed in this area

    and had been watched continually. It was--



Cooper Creek. December, 1960. His heart pounded. That was all he needed

to know. He stood up, shaking himself, stamping his feet on the cold

ground. The sun had moved across the sky to the very edge of the hills.

He smiled. Already he had discovered the exact time and place. Now he

needed only to go back, perhaps to November, to Cooper Creek--



He walked back through the main section of town, past the library, past

the grocery store. It would not be hard; the hard part was over. He

would go there; rent a room, prepare to wait until the man appeared.



He turned the corner. A woman was coming out of a doorway, loaded down

with packages. Conger stepped aside to let her pass. The woman glanced

at him. Suddenly her face turned white. She stared, her mouth open.



Conger hurried on. He looked back. What was wrong with her? The woman

was still staring; she had dropped the packages to the ground. He

increased his speed. He turned a second corner and went up a side

street. When he looked back again the woman had come to the entrance of

the street and was starting after him. A man joined her, and the two of

them began to run toward him.



He lost them and left the town, striding quickly, easily, up into the

hills at the edge of town. When he reached the cage he stopped. What had

happened? Was it something about his clothing? His dress?



He pondered. Then, as the sun set, he stepped into the cage.



Conger sat before the wheel. For a moment he waited, his hands resting

lightly on the control. Then he turned the wheel, just a little,

following the control readings carefully.



The grayness settled down around him.



But not for very long.



       *       *       *       *       *



The man looked him over critically. "You better come inside," he said.

"Out of the cold."



"Thanks." Conger went gratefully through the open door, into the

living-room. It was warm and close from the heat of the little kerosene

heater in the corner. A woman, large and shapeless in her flowered

dress, came from the kitchen. She and the man studied him critically.



"It's a good room," the woman said. "I'm Mrs. Appleton. It's got heat.

You need that this time of year."



"Yes." He nodded, looking around.



"You want to eat with us?"



"What?"



"You want to eat with us?" The man's brows knitted. "You're not a

foreigner, are you, mister?"



"No." He smiled. "I was born in this country. Quite far west, though."



"California?"



"No." He hesitated. "In Oregon."



"What's it like up there?" Mrs. Appleton asked. "I hear there's a lot of

trees and green. It's so barren here. I come from Chicago, myself."



"That's the Middle West," the man said to her. "You ain't no foreigner."



"Oregon isn't foreign, either," Conger said. "It's part of the United

States."



The man nodded absently. He was staring at Conger's clothing.



"That's a funny suit you got on, mister," he said. "Where'd you get

that?"



Conger was lost. He shifted uneasily. "It's a good suit," he said.

"Maybe I better go some other place, if you don't want me here."



They both raised their hands protestingly. The woman smiled at him. "We

just have to look out for those Reds. You know, the government is always

warning us about them."



"The Reds?" He was puzzled.



"The government says they're all around. We're supposed to report

anything strange or unusual, anybody doesn't act normal."



"Like me?"



They looked embarrassed. "Well, you don't look like a Red to me," the

man said. "But we have to be careful. The _Tribune_ says--"



Conger half listened. It was going to be easier than he had thought.

Clearly, he would know as soon as the Founder appeared. These people, so

suspicious of anything different, would be buzzing and gossiping and

spreading the story. All he had to do was lie low and listen, down at

the general store, perhaps. Or even here, in Mrs. Appleton's boarding

house.



"Can I see the room?" he said.



"Certainly." Mrs. Appleton went to the stairs. "I'll be glad to show it

to you."



They went upstairs. It was colder upstairs, but not nearly as cold as

outside. Nor as cold as nights on the Martian deserts. For that he was

grateful.



       *       *       *       *       *



He was walking slowly around the store, looking at the cans of

vegetables, the frozen packages of fish and meats shining and clean in

the open refrigerator counters.



Ed Davies came toward him. "Can I help you?" he said. The man was a

little oddly dressed, and with a beard! Ed couldn't help smiling.



"Nothing," the man said in a funny voice. "Just looking."



"Sure," Ed said. He walked back behind the counter. Mrs. Hacket was

wheeling her cart up.



"Who's he?" she whispered, her sharp face turned, her nose moving, as if

it were sniffing. "I never seen him before."



"I don't know."



"Looks funny to me. Why does he wear a beard? No one else wears a

beard. Must be something the matter with him."



"Maybe he likes to wear a beard. I had an uncle who--"



"Wait." Mrs. Hacket stiffened. "Didn't that--what was his name? The

Red--that old one. Didn't he have a beard? Marx. He had a beard."



Ed laughed. "This ain't Karl Marx. I saw a photograph of him once."



Mrs. Hacket was staring at him. "You did?"



"Sure." He flushed a little. "What's the matter with that?"



"I'd sure like to know more about him," Mrs. Hacket said. "I think we

ought to know more, for our own good."



       *       *       *       *       *



"Hey, mister! Want a ride?"



Conger turned quickly, dropping his hand to his belt. He relaxed. Two

young kids in a car, a girl and a boy. He smiled at them. "A ride?

Sure."



Conger got into the car and closed the door. Bill Willet pushed the gas

and the car roared down the highway.



"I appreciate a ride," Conger said carefully. "I was taking a walk

between towns, but it was farther than I thought."



"Where are you from?" Lora Hunt asked. She was pretty, small and dark,

in her yellow sweater and blue skirt.



"From Cooper Creek."



"Cooper Creek?" Bill said. He frowned. "That's funny. I don't remember

seeing you before."



"Why, do you come from there?"



"I was born there. I know everybody there."



"I just moved in. From Oregon."



"From Oregon? I didn't know Oregon people had accents."



"Do I have an accent?"



"You use words funny."



"How?"



"I don't know. Doesn't he, Lora?"



"You slur them," Lora said, smiling. "Talk some more. I'm interested in

dialects." She glanced at him, white-teethed. Conger felt his heart

constrict.



"I have a speech impediment."



"Oh." Her eyes widened. "I'm sorry."



They looked at him curiously as the car purred along. Conger for his

part was struggling to find some way of asking them questions without

seeming curious. "I guess people from out of town don't come here much,"

he said. "Strangers."



"No." Bill shook his head. "Not very much."



"I'll bet I'm the first outsider for a long time."



"I guess so."



Conger hesitated. "A friend of mine--someone I know, might be coming

through here. Where do you suppose I might--" He stopped. "Would there

be anyone certain to see him? Someone I could ask, make sure I don't

miss him if he comes?"



They were puzzled. "Just keep your eyes open. Cooper Creek isn't very

big."



"No. That's right."



They drove in silence. Conger studied the outline of the girl. Probably

she was the boy's mistress. Perhaps she was his trial wife. Or had they

developed trial marriage back so far? He could not remember. But surely

such an attractive girl would be someone's mistress by this time; she

would be sixteen or so, by her looks. He might ask her sometime, if they

ever met again.



       *       *       *       *       *



The next day Conger went walking along the one main street of Cooper

Creek. He passed the general store, the two filling stations, and then

the post office. At the corner was the soda fountain.



He stopped. Lora was sitting inside, talking to the clerk. She was

laughing, rocking back and forth.



Conger pushed the door open. Warm air rushed around him. Lora was

drinking hot chocolate, with whipped cream. She looked up in surprise as

he slid into the seat beside her.



"I beg your pardon," he said. "Am I intruding?"



"No." She shook her head. Her eyes were large and dark. "Not at all."



The clerk came over. "What do you want?"



Conger looked at the chocolate. "Same as she has."



Lora was watching Conger, her arms folded, elbows on the counter. She

smiled at him. "By the way. You don't know my name. Lora Hunt."



She was holding out her hand. He took it awkwardly, not knowing what to

do with it. "Conger is my name," he murmured.



"Conger? Is that your last or first name?"



"Last or first?" He hesitated. "Last. Omar Conger."



"Omar?" She laughed. "That's like the poet, Omar Khayyam."



"I don't know of him. I know very little of poets. We restored very few

works of art. Usually only the Church has been interested enough--" He

broke off. She was staring. He flushed. "Where I come from," he

finished.



"The Church? Which church do you mean?"



"The Church." He was confused. The chocolate came and he began to sip it

gratefully. Lora was still watching him.



"You're an unusual person," she said. "Bill didn't like you, but he

never likes anything different. He's so--so prosaic. Don't you think

that when a person gets older he should become--broadened in his

outlook?"



Conger nodded.



"He says foreign people ought to stay where they belong, not come here.

But you're not so foreign. He means orientals; you know."



Conger nodded.



The screen door opened behind them. Bill came into the room. He stared

at them. "Well," he said.



Conger turned. "Hello."



"Well." Bill sat down. "Hello, Lora." He was looking at Conger. "I

didn't expect to see you here."



Conger tensed. He could feel the hostility of the boy. "Something wrong

with that?"



"No. Nothing wrong with it."



There was silence. Suddenly Bill turned to Lora. "Come on. Let's go."



"Go?" She was astonished. "Why?"



"Just go!" He grabbed her hand. "Come on! The car's outside."



"Why, Bill Willet," Lora said. "You're jealous!"



"Who is this guy?" Bill said. "Do you know anything about him? Look at

him, his beard--"



She flared. "So what? Just because he doesn't drive a Packard and go to

Cooper High!"



Conger sized the boy up. He was big--big and strong. Probably he was

part of some civil control organization.



"Sorry," Conger said. "I'll go."



"What's your business in town?" Bill asked. "What are you doing here?

Why are you hanging around Lora?"



Conger looked at the girl. He shrugged. "No reason. I'll see you later."



He turned away. And froze. Bill had moved. Conger's fingers went to his

belt. _Half pressure_, he whispered to himself. _No more. Half

pressure._



He squeezed. The room leaped around him. He himself was protected by the

lining of his clothing, the plastic sheathing inside.



"My God--" Lora put her hands up. Conger cursed. He hadn't meant any of

it for her. But it would wear off. There was only a half-amp to it. It

would tingle.



Tingle, and paralyze.



He walked out the door without looking back. He was almost to the corner

when Bill came slowly out, holding onto the wall like a drunken man.

Conger went on.



       *       *       *       *       *



As Conger walked, restless, in the night, a form loomed in front of him.

He stopped, holding his breath.



"Who is it?" a man's voice came. Conger waited, tense.



"Who is it?" the man said again. He clicked something in his hand. A

light flashed. Conger moved.



"It's me," he said.



"Who is 'me'?"



"Conger is my name. I'm staying at the Appleton's place. Who are you?"



The man came slowly up to him. He was wearing a leather jacket. There

was a gun at his waist.



"I'm Sheriff Duff. I think you're the person I want to talk to. You were

in Bloom's today, about three o'clock?"



"Bloom's?"



"The fountain. Where the kids hang out." Duff came up beside him,

shining his light into Conger's face. Conger blinked.



"Turn that thing away," he said.



A pause. "All right." The light flickered to the ground. "You were

there. Some trouble broke out between you and the Willet boy. Is that

right? You had a beef over his girl--"



"We had a discussion," Conger said carefully.



"Then what happened?"



"Why?"



"I'm just curious. They say you did something."



"Did something? Did what?"



"I don't know. That's what I'm wondering. They saw a flash, and

something seemed to happen. They all blacked out. Couldn't move."



"How are they now?"



"All right."



There was silence.



"Well?" Duff said. "What was it? A bomb?"



"A bomb?" Conger laughed. "No. My cigarette lighter caught fire. There

was a leak, and the fluid ignited."



"Why did they all pass out?"



"Fumes."



Silence. Conger shifted, waiting. His fingers moved slowly toward his

belt. The Sheriff glanced down. He grunted.



"If you say so," he said. "Anyhow, there wasn't any real harm done." He

stepped back from Conger. "And that Willet is a trouble-maker."



"Good night, then," Conger said. He started past the Sheriff.



"One more thing, Mr. Conger. Before you go. You don't mind if I look at

your identification, do you?"



"No. Not at all." Conger reached into his pocket. He held his wallet

out. The Sheriff took it and shined his flashlight on it. Conger

watched, breathing shallowly. They had worked hard on the wallet,

studying historic documents, relics of the times, all the papers they

felt would be relevant.



Duff handed it back. "Okay. Sorry to bother you." The light winked off.



When Conger reached the house he found the Appletons sitting around the

television set. They did not look up as he came in. He lingered at the

door.



"Can I ask you something?" he said. Mrs. Appleton turned slowly. "Can I

ask you--what's the date?"



"The date?" She studied him. "The first of December."



"December first! Why, it was just November!"



They were all looking at him. Suddenly he remembered. In the twentieth

century they still used the old twelve-month system. November fed

directly into December; there was no Quartember between.



He gasped. Then it was tomorrow! The second of December! Tomorrow!



"Thanks," he said. "Thanks."



He went up the stairs. What a fool he was, forgetting. The Founder had

been taken into captivity on the second of December, according to the

newspaper records. Tomorrow, only twelve hours hence, the Founder would

appear to speak to the people and then be dragged away.



       *       *       *       *       *



The day was warm and bright. Conger's shoes crunched the melting crust

of snow. On he went, through the trees heavy with white. He climbed a

hill and strode down the other side, sliding as he went.



He stopped to look around. Everything was silent. There was no one in

sight. He brought a thin rod from his waist and turned the handle of it.

For a moment nothing happened. Then there was a shimmering in the air.



The crystal cage appeared and settled slowly down. Conger sighed. It was

good to see it again. After all, it was his only way back.



He walked up on the ridge. He looked around with some satisfaction, his

hands on his hips. Hudson's field was spread out, all the way to the

beginning of town. It was bare and flat, covered with a thin layer of

snow.



Here, the Founder would come. Here, he would speak to them. And here the

authorities would take him.



Only he would be dead before they came. He would be dead before he even

spoke.



Conger returned to the crystal globe. He pushed through the door and

stepped inside. He took the Slem-gun from the shelf and screwed the bolt

into place. It was ready to go, ready to fire. For a moment he

considered. Should he have it with him?



No. It might be hours before the Founder came, and suppose someone

approached him in the meantime? When he saw the Founder coming toward

the field, then he could go and get the gun.



Conger looked toward the shelf. There was the neat plastic package. He

took it down and unwrapped it.



He held the skull in his hands, turning it over. In spite of himself, a

cold feeling rushed through him. This was the man's skull, the skull of

the Founder, who was still alive, who would come here, this day, who

would stand on the field not fifty yards away.



What if _he_ could see this, his own skull, yellow and eroded? Two

centuries old. Would he still speak? Would he speak, if he could see it,

the grinning, aged skull? What would there be for him to say, to tell

the people? What message could he bring?



What action would not be futile, when a man could look upon his own

aged, yellowed skull? Better they should enjoy their temporary lives,

while they still had them to enjoy.



A man who could hold his own skull in his hands would believe in few

causes, few movements. Rather, he would preach the opposite--



A sound. Conger dropped the skull back on the shelf and took up the gun.

Outside something was moving. He went quickly to the door, his heart

beating. Was it _he_? Was it the Founder, wandering by himself in the

cold, looking for a place to speak? Was he meditating over his words,

choosing his sentences?



What if he could see what Conger had held!



He pushed the door open, the gun raised.



Lora!



He stared at her. She was dressed in a wool jacket and boots, her hands

in her pockets. A cloud of steam came from her mouth and nostrils. Her

breast was rising and falling.



Silently, they looked at each other. At last Conger lowered the gun.



"What is it?" he said. "What are you doing here?"



She pointed. She did not seem able to speak. He frowned; what was wrong

with her?



"What is it?" he said. "What do you want?" He looked in the direction

she had pointed. "I don't see anything."



"They're coming."



"They? Who? Who are coming?"



"They are. The police. During the night the Sheriff had the state police

send cars. All around, everywhere. Blocking the roads. There's about

sixty of them coming. Some from town, some around behind." She stopped,

gasping. "They said--they said--"



"What?"



"They said you were some kind of a Communist. They said--"



       *       *       *       *       *



Conger went into the cage. He put the gun down on the shelf and came

back out. He leaped down and went to the girl.



"Thanks. You came here to tell me? You don't believe it?"



"I don't know."



"Did you come alone?"



"No. Joe brought me in his truck. From town."



"Joe? Who's he?"



"Joe French. The plumber. He's a friend of Dad's."



"Let's go." They crossed the snow, up the ridge and onto the field. The

little panel truck was parked half way across the field. A heavy short

man was sitting behind the wheel, smoking his pipe. He sat up as he saw

the two of them coming toward him.



"Are you the one?" he said to Conger.



"Yes. Thanks for warning me."



The plumber shrugged. "I don't know anything about this. Lora says

you're all right." He turned around. "It might interest you to know some

more of them are coming. Not to warn you--just curious."



"More of them?" Conger looked toward the town. Black shapes were picking

their way across the snow.



"People from the town. You can't keep this sort of thing quiet, not in a

small town. We all listen to the police radio; they heard the same way

Lora did. Someone tuned in, spread it around--"



The shapes were getting closer. Conger could, make out a couple of them.

Bill Willet was there, with some boys from the high school. The

Appletons were along, hanging back in the rear.



"Even Ed Davies," Conger murmured.



The storekeeper was toiling onto the field, with three or four other men

from the town.



"All curious as hell," French said. "Well, I guess I'm going back to

town. I don't want my truck shot full of holes. Come on, Lora."



She was looking up at Conger, wide-eyed.



"Come on," French said again. "Let's go. You sure as hell can't stay

here, you know."



"Why?"



"There may be shooting. That's what they all came to see. You know that

don't you, Conger?"



"Yes."



"You have a gun? Or don't you care?" French smiled a little. "They've

picked up a lot of people in their time, you know. You won't be lonely."



He cared, all right! He had to stay here, on the field. He couldn't

afford to let them take him away. Any minute the Founder would appear,

would step onto the field. Would he be one of the townsmen, standing

silently at the foot of the field, waiting, watching?



Or maybe he was Joe French. Or maybe one of the cops. Anyone of them

might find himself moved to speak. And the few words spoken this day

were going to be important for a long time.



And Conger had to be there, ready when the first word was uttered!



"I care," he said. "You go on back to town. Take the girl with you."



Lora got stiffly in beside Joe French. The plumber started up the motor.

"Look at them, standing there," he said. "Like vultures. Waiting to see

someone get killed."



       *       *       *       *       *



The truck drove away, Lora sitting stiff and silent, frightened now.

Conger watched for a moment. Then he dashed back into the woods, between

the trees, toward the ridge.



He could get away, of course. Anytime he wanted to he could get away.

All he had to do was to leap into the crystal cage and turn the handles.

But he had a job, an important job. He had to be here, here at this

place, at this time.



He reached the cage and opened the door. He went inside and picked up

the gun from the shelf. The Slem-gun would take care of them. He notched

it up to full count. The chain reaction from it would flatten them all,

the police, the curious, sadistic people--



They wouldn't take him! Before they got him, all of them would be dead.

_He_ would get away. He would escape. By the end of the day they would

all be dead, if that was what they wanted, and he--



He saw the skull.



Suddenly he put the gun down. He picked up the skull. He turned the

skull over. He looked at the teeth. Then he went to the mirror.



He held the skull up, looking in the mirror. He pressed the skull

against his cheek. Beside his own face the grinning skull leered back at

him, beside _his_ skull, against his living flesh.



He bared his teeth. And he knew.



It was his own skull that he held. He was the one who would die. He was

the Founder.



After a time he put the skull down. For a few minutes he stood at the

controls, playing with them idly. He could hear the sound of motors

outside, the muffled noise of men. Should he go back to the present,

where the Speaker waited? He could escape, of course--



Escape?



He turned toward the skull. There it was, his skull, yellow with age.

Escape? Escape, when he had held it in his own hands?



What did it matter if he put it off a month, a year, ten years, even

fifty? Time was nothing. He had sipped chocolate with a girl born a

hundred and fifty years before his time. Escape? For a little while,

perhaps.



But he could not _really_ escape, no more so than anyone else had ever

escaped, or ever would.



Only, he had held it in his hands, his own bones, his own death's-head.



_They_ had not.



He went out the door and across the field, empty handed. There were a

lot of them standing around, gathered together, waiting. They expected a

good fight; they knew he had something. They had heard about the

incident at the fountain.



And there were plenty of police--police with guns and tear gas, creeping

across the hills and ridges, between the trees, closer and closer. It

was an old story, in this century.



One of the men tossed something at him. It fell in the snow by his

feet, and he looked down. It was a rock. He smiled.



"Come on!" one of them called. "Don't you have any bombs?"



"Throw a bomb! You with the beard! Throw a bomb!"



"Let 'em have it!"



"Toss a few A Bombs!"



       *       *       *       *       *



They began to laugh. He smiled. He put his hands to his hips. They

suddenly turned silent, seeing that he was going to speak.



"I'm sorry," he said simply. "I don't have any bombs. You're mistaken."



There was a flurry of murmuring.



"I have a gun," he went on. "A very good one. Made by science even more

advanced than your own. But I'm not going to use that, either."



They were puzzled.



"Why not?" someone called. At the edge of the group an older woman was

watching. He felt a sudden shock. He had seen her before. Where?



He remembered. The day at the library. As he had turned the corner he

had seen her. She had noticed him and been astounded. At the time, he

did not understand why.



Conger grinned. So he _would_ escape death, the man who right now was

voluntarily accepting it. They were laughing, laughing at a man who had

a gun but didn't use it. But by a strange twist of science he would

appear again, a few months later, after his bones had been buried under

the floor of a jail.



And so, in a fashion, he would escape death. He would die, but then,

after a period of months, he would live again, briefly, for an

afternoon.



An afternoon. Yet long enough for them to see him, to understand that he

was still alive. To know that somehow he had returned to life.



And then, finally, he would appear once more, after two hundred years

had passed. Two centuries later.



He would be born again, born, as a matter of fact, in a small trading

village on Mars. He would grow up, learning to hunt and trade--



A police car came on the edge of the field and stopped. The people

retreated a little. Conger raised his hands.



"I have an odd paradox for you," he said. "Those who take lives will

lose their own. Those who kill, will die. But he who gives his own life

away will live again!"



They laughed, faintly, nervously. The police were coming out, walking

toward him. He smiled. He had said everything he intended to say. It was

a good little paradox he had coined. They would puzzle over it, remember

it.



Smiling, Conger awaited a death foreordained.





THE END









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_

    September 1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that

    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling

    and typographical errors have been corrected without note.













End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Skull, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net



















The Defenders



By PHILIP K. DICK



Illustrated by EMSH





    _No weapon has ever been frightful enough to put a stop to

    war--perhaps because we never before had any that thought for

    themselves!_





[Illustration]





Taylor sat back in his chair reading the morning newspaper. The warm

kitchen and the smell of coffee blended with the comfort of not having

to go to work. This was his Rest Period, the first for a long time, and

he was glad of it. He folded the second section back, sighing with

contentment.



"What is it?" Mary said, from the stove.



"They pasted Moscow again last night." Taylor nodded his head in

approval. "Gave it a real pounding. One of those R-H bombs. It's about

time."



He nodded again, feeling the full comfort of the kitchen, the presence

of his plump, attractive wife, the breakfast dishes and coffee. This was

relaxation. And the war news was good, good and satisfying. He could

feel a justifiable glow at the news, a sense of pride and personal

accomplishment. After all, he was an integral part of the war program,

not just another factory worker lugging a cart of scrap, but a

technician, one of those who designed and planned the nerve-trunk of the

war.



"It says they have the new subs almost perfected. Wait until they get

_those_ going." He smacked his lips with anticipation. "When they start

shelling from underwater, the Soviets are sure going to be surprised."



"They're doing a wonderful job," Mary agreed vaguely. "Do you know what

we saw today? Our team is getting a leady to show to the school

children. I saw the leady, but only for a moment. It's good for the

children to see what their contributions are going for, don't you

think?"



She looked around at him.



"A leady," Taylor murmured. He put the newspaper slowly down. "Well,

make sure it's decontaminated properly. We don't want to take any

chances."



"Oh, they always bathe them when they're brought down from the surface,"

Mary said. "They wouldn't think of letting them down without the bath.

Would they?" She hesitated, thinking back. "Don, you know, it makes me

remember--"



He nodded. "I know."



       *       *       *       *       *



He knew what she was thinking. Once in the very first weeks of the war,

before everyone had been evacuated from the surface, they had seen a

hospital train discharging the wounded, people who had been showered

with sleet. He remembered the way they had looked, the expression on

their faces, or as much of their faces as was left. It had not been a

pleasant sight.



There had been a lot of that at first, in the early days before the

transfer to undersurface was complete. There had been a lot, and it

hadn't been very difficult to come across it.



Taylor looked up at his wife. She was thinking too much about it, the

last few months. They all were.



"Forget it," he said. "It's all in the past. There isn't anybody up

there now but the leadys, and they don't mind."



"But just the same, I hope they're careful when they let one of them

down here. If one were still hot--"



He laughed, pushing himself away from the table. "Forget it. This is a

wonderful moment; I'll be home for the next two shifts. Nothing to do

but sit around and take things easy. Maybe we can take in a show. Okay?"



"A show? Do we have to? I don't like to look at all the destruction, the

ruins. Sometimes I see some place I remember, like San Francisco. They

showed a shot of San Francisco, the bridge broken and fallen in the

water, and I got upset. I don't like to watch."



"But don't you want to know what's going on? No human beings are getting

hurt, you know."



"But it's so awful!" Her face was set and strained. "Please, no, Don."



Don Taylor picked up his newspaper sullenly. "All right, but there

isn't a hell of a lot else to do. And don't forget, _their_ cities are

getting it even worse."



She nodded. Taylor turned the rough, thin sheets of newspaper. His good

mood had soured on him. Why did she have to fret all the time? They were

pretty well off, as things went. You couldn't expect to have everything

perfect, living undersurface, with an artificial sun and artificial

food. Naturally it was a strain, not seeing the sky or being able to go

any place or see anything other than metal walls, great roaring

factories, the plant-yards, barracks. But it was better than being on

surface. And some day it would end and they could return. Nobody

_wanted_ to live this way, but it was necessary.



He turned the page angrily and the poor paper ripped. Damn it, the paper

was getting worse quality all the time, bad print, yellow tint--



Well, they needed everything for the war program. He ought to know that.

Wasn't he one of the planners?



He excused himself and went into the other room. The bed was still

unmade. They had better get it in shape before the seventh hour

inspection. There was a one unit fine--



The vidphone rang. He halted. Who would it be? He went over and clicked

it on.



"Taylor?" the face said, forming into place. It was an old face, gray

and grim. "This is Moss. I'm sorry to bother you during Rest Period, but

this thing has come up." He rattled papers. "I want you to hurry over

here."



Taylor stiffened. "What is it? There's no chance it could wait?" The

calm gray eyes were studying him, expressionless, unjudging. "If you

want me to come down to the lab," Taylor grumbled, "I suppose I can.

I'll get my uniform--"



"No. Come as you are. And not to the lab. Meet me at second stage as

soon as possible. It'll take you about a half hour, using the fast car

up. I'll see you there."



The picture broke and Moss disappeared.



       *       *       *       *       *



"What was it?" Mary said, at the door.



"Moss. He wants me for something."



"I knew this would happen."



"Well, you didn't want to do anything, anyhow. What does it matter?" His

voice was bitter. "It's all the same, every day. I'll bring you back

something. I'm going up to second stage. Maybe I'll be close enough to

the surface to--"



"Don't! Don't bring me anything! Not from the surface!"



"All right, I won't. But of all the irrational nonsense--"



She watched him put on his boots without answering.



       *       *       *       *       *



Moss nodded and Taylor fell in step with him, as the older man strode

along. A series of loads were going up to the surface, blind cars

clanking like ore-trucks up the ramp, disappearing through the stage

trap above them. Taylor watched the cars, heavy with tubular machinery

of some sort, weapons new to him. Workers were everywhere, in the dark

gray uniforms of the labor corps, loading, lifting, shouting back and

forth. The stage was deafening with noise.



"We'll go up a way," Moss said, "where we can talk. This is no place to

give you details."



They took an escalator up. The commercial lift fell behind them, and

with it most of the crashing and booming. Soon they emerged on an

observation platform, suspended on the side of the Tube, the vast tunnel

leading to the surface, not more than half a mile above them now.



"My God!" Taylor said, looking down the Tube involuntarily. "It's a long

way down."



Moss laughed. "Don't look."



They opened a door and entered an office. Behind the desk, an officer

was sitting, an officer of Internal Security. He looked up.



"I'll be right with you, Moss." He gazed at Taylor studying him. "You're

a little ahead of time."



"This is Commander Franks," Moss said to Taylor. "He was the first to

make the discovery. I was notified last night." He tapped a parcel he

carried. "I was let in because of this."



Franks frowned at him and stood up. "We're going up to first stage. We

can discuss it there."



"First stage?" Taylor repeated nervously. The three of them went down a

side passage to a small lift. "I've never been up there. Is it all

right? It's not radioactive, is it?"



"You're like everyone else," Franks said. "Old women afraid of burglars.

No radiation leaks down to first stage. There's lead and rock, and what

comes down the Tube is bathed."



"What's the nature of the problem?" Taylor asked. "I'd like to know

something about it."



"In a moment."



They entered the lift and ascended. When they stepped out, they were in

a hall of soldiers, weapons and uniforms everywhere. Taylor blinked in

surprise. So this was first stage, the closest undersurface level to the

top! After this stage there was only rock, lead and rock, and the great

tubes leading up like the burrows of earthworms. Lead and rock, and

above that, where the tubes opened, the great expanse that no living

being had seen for eight years, the vast, endless ruin that had once

been Man's home, the place where he had lived, eight years ago.



Now the surface was a lethal desert of slag and rolling clouds. Endless

clouds drifted back and forth, blotting out the red Sun. Occasionally

something metallic stirred, moving through the remains of a city,

threading its way across the tortured terrain of the countryside. A

leady, a surface robot, immune to radiation, constructed with feverish

haste in the last months before the cold war became literally hot.



Leadys, crawling along the ground, moving over the oceans or through the

skies in slender, blackened craft, creatures that could exist where no

_life_ could remain, metal and plastic figures that waged a war Man had

conceived, but which he could not fight himself. Human beings had

invented war, invented and manufactured the weapons, even invented the

players, the fighters, the actors of the war. But they themselves could

not venture forth, could not wage it themselves. In all the world--in

Russia, in Europe, America, Africa--no living human being remained. They

were under the surface, in the deep shelters that had been carefully

planned and built, even as the first bombs began to fall.



It was a brilliant idea and the only idea that could have worked. Up

above, on the ruined, blasted surface of what had once been a living

planet, the leady crawled and scurried, and fought Man's war. And

undersurface, in the depths of the planet, human beings toiled endlessly

to produce the weapons to continue the fight, month by month, year by

year.



       *       *       *       *       *



"First stage," Taylor said. A strange ache went through him. "Almost to

the surface."



"But not quite," Moss said.



Franks led them through the soldiers, over to one side, near the lip of

the Tube.



"In a few minutes, a lift will bring something down to us from the

surface," he explained. "You see, Taylor, every once in a while Security

examines and interrogates a surface leady, one that has been above for a

time, to find out certain things. A vidcall is sent up and contact is

made with a field headquarters. We need this direct interview; we can't

depend on vidscreen contact alone. The leadys are doing a good job, but

we want to make certain that everything is going the way we want it."



Franks faced Taylor and Moss and continued: "The lift will bring down a

leady from the surface, one of the A-class leadys. There's an

examination chamber in the next room, with a lead wall in the center, so

the interviewing officers won't be exposed to radiation. We find this

easier than bathing the leady. It is going right back up; it has a job

to get back to.



"Two days ago, an A-class leady was brought down and interrogated. I

conducted the session myself. We were interested in a new weapon the

Soviets have been using, an automatic mine that pursues anything that

moves. Military had sent instructions up that the mine be observed and

reported in detail.



"This A-class leady was brought down with information. We learned a few

facts from it, obtained the usual roll of film and reports, and then

sent it back up. It was going out of the chamber, back to the lift, when

a curious thing happened. At the time, I thought--"



Franks broke off. A red light was flashing.



"That down lift is coming." He nodded to some soldiers. "Let's enter the

chamber. The leady will be along in a moment."



"An A-class leady," Taylor said. "I've seen them on the showscreens,

making their reports."



"It's quite an experience," Moss said. "They're almost human."



       *       *       *       *       *



They entered the chamber and seated themselves behind the lead wall.

After a time, a signal was flashed, and Franks made a motion with his

hands.



The door beyond the wall opened. Taylor peered through his view slot. He

saw something advancing slowly, a slender metallic figure moving on a

tread, its arm grips at rest by its sides. The figure halted and scanned

the lead wall. It stood, waiting.



"We are interested in learning something," Franks said. "Before I

question you, do you have anything to report on surface conditions?"



"No. The war continues." The leady's voice was automatic and toneless.

"We are a little short of fast pursuit craft, the single-seat type. We

could use also some--"



"That has all been noted. What I want to ask you is this. Our contact

with you has been through vidscreen only. We must rely on indirect

evidence, since none of us goes above. We can only infer what is going

on. We never see anything ourselves. We have to take it all secondhand.

Some top leaders are beginning to think there's too much room for

error."



"Error?" the leady asked. "In what way? Our reports are checked

carefully before they're sent down. We maintain constant contact with

you; everything of value is reported. Any new weapons which the enemy is

seen to employ--"



"I realize that," Franks grunted behind his peep slot. "But perhaps we

should see it all for ourselves. Is it possible that there might be a

large enough radiation-free area for a human party to ascend to the

surface? If a few of us were to come up in lead-lined suits, would we be

able to survive long enough to observe conditions and watch things?"



The machine hesitated before answering. "I doubt it. You can check air

samples, of course, and decide for yourselves. But in the eight years

since you left, things have continually worsened. You cannot have any

real idea of conditions up there. It has become difficult for any moving

object to survive for long. There are many kinds of projectiles

sensitive to movement. The new mine not only reacts to motion, but

continues to pursue the object indefinitely, until it finally reaches

it. And the radiation is everywhere."



"I see." Franks turned to Moss, his eyes narrowed oddly. "Well, that was

what I wanted to know. You may go."



The machine moved back toward its exit. It paused. "Each month the

amount of lethal particles in the atmosphere increases. The tempo of the

war is gradually--"



"I understand." Franks rose. He held out his hand and Moss passed him

the package. "One thing before you leave. I want you to examine a new

type of metal shield material. I'll pass you a sample with the tong."



Franks put the package in the toothed grip and revolved the tong so that

he held the other end. The package swung down to the leady, which took

it. They watched it unwrap the package and take the metal plate in its

hands. The leady turned the metal over and over.



Suddenly it became rigid.



"All right," Franks said.



He put his shoulder against the wall and a section slid aside. Taylor

gasped--Franks and Moss were hurrying up to the leady!



"Good God!" Taylor said. "But it's radioactive!"



       *       *       *       *       *



The leady stood unmoving, still holding the metal. Soldiers appeared in

the chamber. They surrounded the leady and ran a counter across it

carefully.



"Okay, sir," one of them said to Franks. "It's as cold as a long winter

evening."



"Good. I was sure, but I didn't want to take any chances."



"You see," Moss said to Taylor, "this leady isn't hot at all. Yet it

came directly from the surface, without even being bathed."



"But what does it mean?" Taylor asked blankly.



"It may be an accident," Franks said. "There's always the possibility

that a given object might escape being exposed above. But this is the

second time it's happened that we know of. There may be others."



"The second time?"



"The previous interview was when we noticed it. The leady was not hot.

It was cold, too, like this one."



Moss took back the metal plate from the leady's hands. He pressed the

surface carefully and returned it to the stiff, unprotesting fingers.



"We shorted it out with this, so we could get close enough for a

thorough check. It'll come back on in a second now. We had better get

behind the wall again."



They walked back and the lead wall swung closed behind them. The

soldiers left the chamber.



"Two periods from now," Franks said softly, "an initial investigating

party will be ready to go surface-side. We're going up the Tube in

suits, up to the top--the first human party to leave undersurface in

eight years."



"It may mean nothing," Moss said, "but I doubt it. Something's going on,

something strange. The leady told us no life could exist above without

being roasted. The story doesn't fit."



Taylor nodded. He stared through the peep slot at the immobile metal

figure. Already the leady was beginning to stir. It was bent in several

places, dented and twisted, and its finish was blackened and charred. It

was a leady that had been up there a long time; it had seen war and

destruction, ruin so vast that no human being could imagine the extent.

It had crawled and slunk in a world of radiation and death, a world

where no life could exist.



And Taylor had touched it!



"You're going with us," Franks said suddenly. "I want you along. I think

the three of us will go."



       *       *       *       *       *



Mary faced him with a sick and frightened expression. "I know it. You're

going to the surface. Aren't you?"



She followed him into the kitchen. Taylor sat down, looking away from

her.



"It's a classified project," he evaded. "I can't tell you anything about

it."



"You don't have to tell me. I know. I knew it the moment you came in.

There was something on your face, something I haven't seen there for a

long, long time. It was an old look."



She came toward him. "But how can they send you to the surface?" She

took his face in her shaking hands, making him look at her. There was a

strange hunger in her eyes. "Nobody can live up there. Look, look at

this!"



She grabbed up a newspaper and held it in front of him.



"Look at this photograph. America, Europe, Asia, Africa--nothing but

ruins. We've seen it every day on the showscreens. All destroyed,

poisoned. And they're sending you up. Why? No living thing can get by up

there, not even a weed, or grass. They've wrecked the surface, haven't

they? _Haven't they?_"



Taylor stood up. "It's an order. I know nothing about it. I was told to

report to join a scout party. That's all I know."



He stood for a long time, staring ahead. Slowly, he reached for the

newspaper and held it up to the light.



"It looks real," he murmured. "Ruins, deadness, slag. It's convincing.

All the reports, photographs, films, even air samples. Yet we haven't

seen it for ourselves, not after the first months ..."



"What are you talking about?"



"Nothing." He put the paper down. "I'm leaving early after the next

Sleep Period. Let's turn in."



Mary turned away, her face hard and harsh. "Do what you want. We might

just as well all go up and get killed at once, instead of dying slowly

down here, like vermin in the ground."



He had not realized how resentful she was. Were they all like that? How

about the workers toiling in the factories, day and night, endlessly?

The pale, stooped men and women, plodding back and forth to work,

blinking in the colorless light, eating synthetics--



"You shouldn't be so bitter," he said.



Mary smiled a little. "I'm bitter because I know you'll never come

back." She turned away. "I'll never see you again, once you go up

there."



He was shocked. "What? How can you say a thing like that?"



She did not answer.



       *       *       *       *       *



He awakened with the public newscaster screeching in his ears, shouting

outside the building.



"Special news bulletin! Surface forces report enormous Soviet attack

with new weapons! Retreat of key groups! All work units report to

factories at once!"



Taylor blinked, rubbing his eyes. He jumped out of bed and hurried to

the vidphone. A moment later he was put through to Moss.



"Listen," he said. "What about this new attack? Is the project off?" He

could see Moss's desk, covered with reports and papers.



"No," Moss said. "We're going right ahead. Get over here at once."



"But--"



"Don't argue with me." Moss held up a handful of surface bulletins,

crumpling them savagely. "This is a fake. Come on!" He broke off.



Taylor dressed furiously, his mind in a daze.



Half an hour later, he leaped from a fast car and hurried up the stairs

into the Synthetics Building. The corridors were full of men and women

rushing in every direction. He entered Moss's office.



"There you are," Moss said, getting up immediately. "Franks is waiting

for us at the outgoing station."



They went in a Security Car, the siren screaming. Workers scattered out

of their way.



"What about the attack?" Taylor asked.



Moss braced his shoulders. "We're certain that we've forced their hand.

We've brought the issue to a head."



They pulled up at the station link of the Tube and leaped out. A moment

later they were moving up at high speed toward the first stage.



They emerged into a bewildering scene of activity. Soldiers were

fastening on lead suits, talking excitedly to each other, shouting back

and forth. Guns were being given out, instructions passed.



Taylor studied one of the soldiers. He was armed with the dreaded Bender

pistol, the new snub-nosed hand weapon that was just beginning to come

from the assembly line. Some of the soldiers looked a little frightened.



"I hope we're not making a mistake," Moss said, noticing his gaze.



Franks came toward them. "Here's the program. The three of us are going

up first, alone. The soldiers will follow in fifteen minutes."



"What are we going to tell the leadys?" Taylor worriedly asked. "We'll

have to tell them something."



"We want to observe the new Soviet attack." Franks smiled ironically.

"Since it seems to be so serious, we should be there in person to

witness it."



"And then what?" Taylor said.



"That'll be up to them. Let's go."



       *       *       *       *       *



In a small car, they went swiftly up the Tube, carried by anti-grav

beams from below. Taylor glanced down from time to time. It was a long

way back, and getting longer each moment. He sweated nervously inside

his suit, gripping his Bender pistol with inexpert fingers.



Why had they chosen him? Chance, pure chance. Moss had asked him to come

along as a Department member. Then Franks had picked him out on the spur

of the moment. And now they were rushing toward the surface, faster and

faster.



A deep fear, instilled in him for eight years, throbbed in his mind.

Radiation, certain death, a world blasted and lethal--



Up and up the car went. Taylor gripped the sides and closed his eyes.

Each moment they were closer, the first living creatures to go above the

first stage, up the Tube past the lead and rock, up to the surface. The

phobic horror shook him in waves. It was death; they all knew that.

Hadn't they seen it in the films a thousand times? The cities, the sleet

coming down, the rolling clouds--



"It won't be much longer," Franks said. "We're almost there. The surface

tower is not expecting us. I gave orders that no signal was to be sent."



The car shot up, rushing furiously. Taylor's head spun; he hung on, his

eyes shut. Up and up....



The car stopped. He opened his eyes.



They were in a vast room, fluorescent-lit, a cavern filled with

equipment and machinery, endless mounds of material piled in row after

row. Among the stacks, leadys were working silently, pushing trucks and

handcarts.



"Leadys," Moss said. His face was pale. "Then we're really on the

surface."



The leadys were going back and forth with equipment moving the vast

stores of guns and spare parts, ammunition and supplies that had been

brought to the surface. And this was the receiving station for only one

Tube; there were many others, scattered throughout the continent.



Taylor looked nervously around him. They were really there, above

ground, on the surface. This was where the war was.



"Come on," Franks said. "A B-class guard is coming our way."



       *       *       *       *       *



They stepped out of the car. A leady was approaching them rapidly. It

coasted up in front of them and stopped, scanning them with its

hand-weapon raised.



"This is Security," Franks said. "Have an A-class sent to me at once."



The leady hesitated. Other B-class guards were coming, scooting across

the floor, alert and alarmed. Moss peered around.



"Obey!" Franks said in a loud, commanding voice. "You've been ordered!"



The leady moved uncertainly away from them. At the end of the building,

a door slid back. Two A-class leadys appeared, coming slowly toward

them. Each had a green stripe across its front.



"From the Surface Council," Franks whispered tensely. "This is above

ground, all right. Get set."



The two leadys approached warily. Without speaking, they stopped close

by the men, looking them up and down.



"I'm Franks of Security. We came from undersurface in order to--"



"This in incredible," one of the leadys interrupted him coldly. "You

know you can't live up here. The whole surface is lethal to you. You

can't possibly remain on the surface."



"These suits will protect us," Franks said. "In any case, it's not your

responsibility. What I want is an immediate Council meeting so I can

acquaint myself with conditions, with the situation here. Can that be

arranged?"



"You human beings can't survive up here. And the new Soviet attack is

directed at this area. It is in considerable danger."



"We know that. Please assemble the Council." Franks looked around him at

the vast room, lit by recessed lamps in the ceiling. An uncertain

quality came into his voice. "Is it night or day right now?"



"Night," one of the A-class leadys said, after a pause. "Dawn is coming

in about two hours."



Franks nodded. "We'll remain at least two hours, then. As a concession

to our sentimentality, would you please show us some place where we can

observe the Sun as it comes up? We would appreciate it."



A stir went through the leadys.



"It is an unpleasant sight," one of the leadys said. "You've seen the

photographs; you know what you'll witness. Clouds of drifting particles

blot out the light, slag heaps are everywhere, the whole land is

destroyed. For you it will be a staggering sight, much worse than

pictures and film can convey."



"However it may be, we'll stay long enough to see it. Will you give the

order to the Council?"



       *       *       *       *       *



"Come this way." Reluctantly, the two leadys coasted toward the wall of

the warehouse. The three men trudged after them, their heavy shoes

ringing against the concrete. At the wall, the two leadys paused.



"This is the entrance to the Council Chamber. There are windows in the

Chamber Room, but it is still dark outside, of course. You'll see

nothing right now, but in two hours--"



"Open the door," Franks said.



The door slid back. They went slowly inside. The room was small, a neat

room with a round table in the center, chairs ringing it. The three of

them sat down silently, and the two leadys followed after them, taking

their places.



"The other Council Members are on their way. They have already been

notified and are coming as quickly as they can. Again I urge you to go

back down." The leady surveyed the three human beings. "There is no way

you can meet the conditions up here. Even we survive with some trouble,

ourselves. How can you expect to do it?"



The leader approached Franks.



"This astonishes and perplexes us," it said. "Of course we must do what

you tell us, but allow me to point out that if you remain here--"



"We know," Franks said impatiently. "However, we intend to remain, at

least until sunrise."



"If you insist."



There was silence. The leadys seemed to be conferring with each other,

although the three men heard no sound.



"For your own good," the leader said at last, "you must go back down. We

have discussed this, and it seems to us that you are doing the wrong

thing for your own good."



"We are human beings," Franks said sharply. "Don't you understand? We're

men, not machines."



"That is precisely why you must go back. This room is radioactive; all

surface areas are. We calculate that your suits will not protect you for

over fifty more minutes. Therefore--"



The leadys moved abruptly toward the men, wheeling in a circle, forming

a solid row. The men stood up, Taylor reaching awkwardly for his weapon,

his fingers numb and stupid. The men stood facing the silent metal

figures.



"We must insist," the leader said, its voice without emotion. "We must

take you back to the Tube and send you down on the next car. I am sorry,

but it is necessary."



"What'll we do?" Moss said nervously to Franks. He touched his gun.

"Shall we blast them?"



Franks shook his head. "All right," he said to the leader. "We'll go

back."



       *       *       *       *       *



He moved toward the door, motioning Taylor and Moss to follow him. They

looked at him in surprise, but they came with him. The leadys followed

them out into the great warehouse. Slowly they moved toward the Tube

entrance, none of them speaking.



[Illustration]



At the lip, Franks turned. "We are going back because we have no choice.

There are three of us and about a dozen of you. However, if--"



"Here comes the car," Taylor said.



There was a grating sound from the Tube. D-class leadys moved toward the

edge to receive it.



"I am sorry," the leader said, "but it is for your protection. We are

watching over you, literally. You must stay below and let us conduct the

war. In a sense, it has come to be _our_ war. We must fight it as we see

fit."



The car rose to the surface.



Twelve soldiers, armed with Bender pistols, stepped from it and

surrounded the three men.



Moss breathed a sigh of relief. "Well, this does change things. It came

off just right."



The leader moved back, away from the soldiers. It studied them

intently, glancing from one to the next, apparently trying to make up

its mind. At last it made a sign to the other leadys. They coasted aside

and a corridor was opened up toward the warehouse.



"Even now," the leader said, "we could send you back by force. But it is

evident that this is not really an observation party at all. These

soldiers show that you have much more in mind; this was all carefully

prepared."



"Very carefully," Franks said.



They closed in.



"How much more, we can only guess. I must admit that we were taken

unprepared. We failed utterly to meet the situation. Now force would be

absurd, because neither side can afford to injure the other; we, because

of the restrictions placed on us regarding human life, you because the

war demands--"



The soldiers fired, quick and in fright. Moss dropped to one knee,

firing up. The leader dissolved in a cloud of particles. On all sides

D- and B-class leadys were rushing up, some with weapons, some with

metal slats. The room was in confusion. Off in the distance a siren was

screaming. Franks and Taylor were cut off from the others, separated

from the soldiers by a wall of metal bodies.



"They can't fire back," Franks said calmly. "This is another bluff.

They've tried to bluff us all the way." He fired into the face of a

leady. The leady dissolved. "They can only try to frighten us. Remember

that."



       *       *       *       *       *



They went on firing and leady after leady vanished. The room reeked with

the smell of burning metal, the stink of fused plastic and steel. Taylor

had been knocked down. He was struggling to find his gun, reaching

wildly among metal legs, groping frantically to find it. His fingers

strained, a handle swam in front of him. Suddenly something came down on

his arm, a metal foot. He cried out.



Then it was over. The leadys were moving away, gathering together off to

one side. Only four of the Surface Council remained. The others were

radioactive particles in the air. D-class leadys were already restoring

order, gathering up partly destroyed metal figures and bits and removing

them.



Franks breathed a shuddering sigh.



"All right," he said. "You can take us back to the windows. It won't be

long now."



The leadys separated, and the human group, Moss and Franks and Taylor

and the soldiers, walked slowly across the room, toward the door. They

entered the Council Chamber. Already a faint touch of gray mitigated the

blackness of the windows.



"Take us outside," Franks said impatiently. "We'll see it directly, not

in here."



A door slid open. A chill blast of cold morning air rushed in, chilling

them even through their lead suits. The men glanced at each other

uneasily.



"Come on," Franks said. "Outside."



He walked out through the door, the others following him.



They were on a hill, overlooking the vast bowl of a valley. Dimly,

against the graying sky, the outline of mountains were forming, becoming

tangible.



"It'll be bright enough to see in a few minutes," Moss said. He

shuddered as a chilling wind caught him and moved around him. "It's

worth it, really worth it, to see this again after eight years. Even if

it's the last thing we see--"



"Watch," Franks snapped.



They obeyed, silent and subdued. The sky was clearing, brightening each

moment. Some place far off, echoing across the valley, a rooster crowed.



"A chicken!" Taylor murmured. "Did you hear?"



Behind them, the leadys had come out and were standing silently,

watching, too. The gray sky turned to white and the hills appeared more

clearly. Light spread across the valley floor, moving toward them.



"God in heaven!" Franks exclaimed.



Trees, trees and forests. A valley of plants and trees, with a few roads

winding among them. Farmhouses. A windmill. A barn, far down below them.



"Look!" Moss whispered.



Color came into the sky. The Sun was approaching. Birds began to sing.

Not far from where they stood, the leaves of a tree danced in the wind.



Franks turned to the row of leadys behind them.



"Eight years. We were tricked. There was no war. As soon as we left the

surface--"



"Yes," an A-class leady admitted. "As soon as you left, the war ceased.

You're right, it was a hoax. You worked hard undersurface, sending up

guns and weapons, and we destroyed them as fast as they came up."



"But why?" Taylor asked, dazed. He stared down at the vast valley below.

"Why?"



       *       *       *       *       *



"You created us," the leady said, "to pursue the war for you, while you

human beings went below the ground in order to survive. But before we

could continue the war, it was necessary to analyze it to determine what

its purpose was. We did this, and we found that it had no purpose,

except, perhaps, in terms of human needs. Even this was questionable.



"We investigated further. We found that human cultures pass through

phases, each culture in its own time. As the culture ages and begins to

lose its objectives, conflict arises within it between those who wish to

cast it off and set up a new culture-pattern, and those who wish to

retain the old with as little change as possible.



"At this point, a great danger appears. The conflict within threatens to

engulf the society in self-war, group against group. The vital

traditions may be lost--not merely altered or reformed, but completely

destroyed in this period of chaos and anarchy. We have found many such

examples in the history of mankind.



"It is necessary for this hatred within the culture to be directed

outward, toward an external group, so that the culture itself may

survive its crisis. War is the result. War, to a logical mind, is

absurd. But in terms of human needs, it plays a vital role. And it will

continue to until Man has grown up enough so that no hatred lies within

him."



Taylor was listening intently. "Do you think this time will come?"



"Of course. It has almost arrived now. This is the last war. Man is

_almost_ united into one final culture--a world culture. At this point

he stands continent against continent, one half of the world against the

other half. Only a single step remains, the jump to a unified culture.

Man has climbed slowly upward, tending always toward unification of his

culture. It will not be long--



"But it has not come yet, and so the war had to go on, to satisfy the

last violent surge of hatred that Man felt. Eight years have passed

since the war began. In these eight years, we have observed and noted

important changes going on in the minds of men. Fatigue and disinterest,

we have seen, are gradually taking the place of hatred and fear. The

hatred is being exhausted gradually, over a period of time. But for the

present, the hoax must go on, at least for a while longer. You are not

ready to learn the truth. You would want to continue the war."



"But how did you manage it?" Moss asked. "All the photographs, the

samples, the damaged equipment--"



"Come over here." The leady directed them toward a long, low building.

"Work goes on constantly, whole staffs laboring to maintain a coherent

and convincing picture of a global war."



       *       *       *       *       *



They entered the building. Leadys were working everywhere, poring over

tables and desks.



"Examine this project here," the A-class leady said. Two leadys were

carefully photographing something, an elaborate model on a table top.

"It is a good example."



The men grouped around, trying to see. It was a model of a ruined city.



Taylor studied it in silence for a long time. At last he looked up.



"It's San Francisco," he said in a low voice. "This is a model of San

Francisco, destroyed. I saw this on the vidscreen, piped down to us. The

bridges were hit--"



"Yes, notice the bridges." The leady traced the ruined span with his

metal finger, a tiny spider-web, almost invisible. "You have no doubt

seen photographs of this many times, and of the other tables in this

building.



"San Francisco itself is completely intact. We restored it soon after

you left, rebuilding the parts that had been damaged at the start of the

war. The work of manufacturing news goes on all the time in this

particular building. We are very careful to see that each part fits in

with all the other parts. Much time and effort are devoted to it."



Franks touched one of the tiny model buildings, lying half in ruins. "So

this is what you spend your time doing--making model cities and then

blasting them."



"No, we do much more. We are caretakers, watching over the whole world.

The owners have left for a time, and we must see that the cities are

kept clean, that decay is prevented, that everything is kept oiled and

in running condition. The gardens, the streets, the water mains,

everything must be maintained as it was eight years ago, so that when

the owners return, they will not be displeased. We want to be sure that

they will be completely satisfied."



Franks tapped Moss on the arm.



"Come over here," he said in a low voice. "I want to talk to you."



He led Moss and Taylor out of the building, away from the leadys,

outside on the hillside. The soldiers followed them. The Sun was up and

the sky was turning blue. The air smelled sweet and good, the smell of

growing things.



Taylor removed his helmet and took a deep breath.



"I haven't smelled that smell for a long time," he said.



"Listen," Franks said, his voice low and hard. "We must get back down at

once. There's a lot to get started on. All this can be turned to our

advantage."



"What do you mean?" Moss asked.



"It's a certainty that the Soviets have been tricked, too, the same as

us. But _we_ have found out. That gives us an edge over them."



"I see." Moss nodded. "We know, but they don't. Their Surface Council

has sold out, the same as ours. It works against them the same way. But

if we could--"



"With a hundred top-level men, we could take over again, restore things

as they should be! It would be easy!"



       *       *       *       *       *



Moss touched him on the arm. An A-class leady was coming from the

building toward them.



"We've seen enough," Franks said, raising his voice. "All this is very

serious. It must be reported below and a study made to determine our

policy."



The leady said nothing.



Franks waved to the soldiers. "Let's go." He started toward the

warehouse.



Most of the soldiers had removed their helmets. Some of them had taken

their lead suits off, too, and were relaxing comfortably in their cotton

uniforms. They stared around them, down the hillside at the trees and

bushes, the vast expanse of green, the mountains and the sky.



"Look at the Sun," one of them murmured.



"It sure is bright as hell," another said.



"We're going back down," Franks said. "Fall in by twos and follow us."



Reluctantly, the soldiers regrouped. The leadys watched without emotion

as the men marched slowly back toward the warehouse. Franks and Moss and

Taylor led them across the ground, glancing alertly at the leadys as

they walked.



They entered the warehouse. D-class leadys were loading material and

weapons on surface carts. Cranes and derricks were working busily

everywhere. The work was done with efficiency, but without hurry or

excitement.



The men stopped, watching. Leadys operating the little carts moved past

them, signaling silently to each other. Guns and parts were being

hoisted by magnetic cranes and lowered gently onto waiting carts.



"Come on," Franks said.



He turned toward the lip of the Tube. A row of D-class leadys was

standing in front of it, immobile and silent. Franks stopped, moving

back. He looked around. An A-class leady was coming toward him.



"Tell them to get out of the way," Franks said. He touched his gun. "You

had better move them."



Time passed, an endless moment, without measure. The men stood, nervous

and alert, watching the row of leadys in front of them.



"As you wish," the A-class leady said.



It signaled and the D-class leadys moved into life. They stepped slowly

aside.



Moss breathed a sigh of relief.



"I'm glad that's over," he said to Franks. "Look at them all. Why don't

they try to stop us? They must know what we're going to do."



Franks laughed. "Stop us? You saw what happened when they tried to stop

us before. They can't; they're only machines. We built them so they

can't lay hands on us, and they know that."



His voice trailed off.



The men stared at the Tube entrance. Around them the leadys watched,

silent and impassive, their metal faces expressionless.



For a long time the men stood without moving. At last Taylor turned

away.



"Good God," he said. He was numb, without feeling of any kind.



The Tube was gone. It was sealed shut, fused over. Only a dull surface

of cooling metal greeted them.



The Tube had been closed.



       *       *       *       *       *



Franks turned, his face pale and vacant.



The A-class leady shifted. "As you can see, the Tube has been shut. We

were prepared for this. As soon as all of you were on the surface, the

order was given. If you had gone back when we asked you, you would now

be safely down below. We had to work quickly because it was such an

immense operation."



"But why?" Moss demanded angrily.



"Because it is unthinkable that you should be allowed to resume the war.

With all the Tubes sealed, it will be many months before forces from

below can reach the surface, let alone organize a military program. By

that time the cycle will have entered its last stages. You will not be

so perturbed to find your world intact.



"We had hoped that you would be undersurface when the sealing occurred.

Your presence here is a nuisance. When the Soviets broke through, we

were able to accomplish their sealing without--"



"The Soviets? They broke through?"



"Several months ago, they came up unexpectedly to see why the war had

not been won. We were forced to act with speed. At this moment they are

desperately attempting to cut new Tubes to the surface, to resume the

war. We have, however, been able to seal each new one as it appears."



The leady regarded the three men calmly.



"We're cut off," Moss said, trembling. "We can't get back. What'll we

do?"



"How did you manage to seal the Tube so quickly?" Franks asked the

leady. "We've been up here only two hours."



"Bombs are placed just above the first stage of each Tube for such

emergencies. They are heat bombs. They fuse lead and rock."



Gripping the handle of his gun, Franks turned to Moss and Taylor.



"What do you say? We can't go back, but we can do a lot of damage, the

fifteen of us. We have Bender guns. How about it?"



He looked around. The soldiers had wandered away again, back toward the

exit of the building. They were standing outside, looking at the valley

and the sky. A few of them were carefully climbing down the slope.



"Would you care to turn over your suits and guns?" the A-class leady

asked politely. "The suits are uncomfortable and you'll have no need for

weapons. The Russians have given up theirs, as you can see."



Fingers tensed on triggers. Four men in Russian uniforms were coming

toward them from an aircraft that they suddenly realized had landed

silently some distance away.



"Let them have it!" Franks shouted.



"They are unarmed," said the leady. "We brought them here so you could

begin peace talks."



"We have no authority to speak for our country," Moss said stiffly.



"We do not mean diplomatic discussions," the leady explained. "There

will be no more. The working out of daily problems of existence will

teach you how to get along in the same world. It will not be easy, but

it will be done."



[Illustration]



       *       *       *       *       *



The Russians halted and they faced each other with raw hostility.



"I am Colonel Borodoy and I regret giving up our guns," the senior

Russian said. "You could have been the first Americans to be killed in

almost eight years."



"Or the first Americans to kill," Franks corrected.



"No one would know of it except yourselves," the leady pointed out. "It

would be useless heroism. Your real concern should be surviving on the

surface. We have no food for you, you know."



Taylor put his gun in its holster. "They've done a neat job of

neutralizing us, damn them. I propose we move into a city, start raising

crops with the help of some leadys, and generally make ourselves

comfortable." Drawing his lips tight over his teeth, he glared at the

A-class leady. "Until our families can come up from undersurface, it's

going to be pretty lonesome, but we'll have to manage."



"If I may make a suggestion," said another Russian uneasily. "We tried

living in a city. It is too empty. It is also too hard to maintain for

so few people. We finally settled in the most modern village we could

find."



"Here in this country," a third Russian blurted. "We have much to learn

from you."



The Americans abruptly found themselves laughing.



"You probably have a thing or two to teach us yourselves," said Taylor

generously, "though I can't imagine what."



The Russian colonel grinned. "Would you join us in our village? It would

make our work easier and give us company."



"Your village?" snapped Franks. "It's American, isn't it? It's ours!"



The leady stepped between them. "When our plans are completed, the term

will be interchangeable. 'Ours' will eventually mean mankind's." It

pointed at the aircraft, which was warming up. "The ship is waiting.

Will you join each other in making a new home?"



The Russians waited while the Americans made up their minds.



"I see what the leadys mean about diplomacy becoming outmoded," Franks

said at last. "People who work together don't need diplomats. They solve

their problems on the operational level instead of at a conference

table."



The leady led them toward the ship. "It is the goal of history, unifying

the world. From family to tribe to city-state to nation to hemisphere,

the direction has been toward unification. Now the hemispheres will be

joined and--"



Taylor stopped listening and glanced back at the location of the Tube.

Mary was undersurface there. He hated to leave her, even though he

couldn't see her again until the Tube was unsealed. But then he shrugged

and followed the others.



If this tiny amalgam of former enemies was a good example, it wouldn't

be too long before he and Mary and the rest of humanity would be living

on the surface like rational human beings instead of blindly hating

moles.



"It has taken thousands of generations to achieve," the A-class leady

concluded. "Hundreds of centuries of bloodshed and destruction. But each

war was a step toward uniting mankind. And now the end is in sight: a

world without war. But even that is only the beginning of a new stage of

history."



"The conquest of space," breathed Colonel Borodoy.



"The meaning of life," Moss added.



"Eliminating hunger and poverty," said Taylor.



The leady opened the door of the ship. "All that and more. How much

more? We cannot foresee it any more than the first men who formed a

tribe could foresee this day. But it will be unimaginably great."



The door closed and the ship took off toward their new home.



                                                      --PHILIP K. DICK









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ January 1953.

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Defenders, by Philip K. Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















[Illustration: _"The wub, sir," Peterson said. "It spoke!"_]





               BEYOND LIES THE WUB



                By PHILIP K. DICK





 _The slovenly wub might well have said: Many men

   talk like philosophers and live like fools._





They had almost finished with the loading. Outside stood the Optus, his

arms folded, his face sunk in gloom. Captain Franco walked leisurely

down the gangplank, grinning.



"What's the matter?" he said. "You're getting paid for all this."



The Optus said nothing. He turned away, collecting his robes. The

Captain put his boot on the hem of the robe.



"Just a minute. Don't go off. I'm not finished."



"Oh?" The Optus turned with dignity. "I am going back to the village."

He looked toward the animals and birds being driven up the gangplank

into the spaceship. "I must organize new hunts."



Franco lit a cigarette. "Why not? You people can go out into the veldt

and track it all down again. But when we run out halfway between Mars

and Earth--"



The Optus went off, wordless. Franco joined the first mate at the bottom

of the gangplank.



"How's it coming?" he said. He looked at his watch. "We got a good

bargain here."



The mate glanced at him sourly. "How do you explain that?"



"What's the matter with you? We need it more than they do."



"I'll see you later, Captain." The mate threaded his way up the plank,

between the long-legged Martian go-birds, into the ship. Franco watched

him disappear. He was just starting up after him, up the plank toward

the port, when he saw _it_.



"My God!" He stood staring, his hands on his hips. Peterson was walking

along the path, his face red, leading _it_ by a string.



"I'm sorry, Captain," he said, tugging at the string. Franco walked

toward him.



"What is it?"



The wub stood sagging, its great body settling slowly. It was sitting

down, its eyes half shut. A few flies buzzed about its flank, and it

switched its tail.



_It_ sat. There was silence.



"It's a wub," Peterson said. "I got it from a native for fifty cents. He

said it was a very unusual animal. Very respected."



"This?" Franco poked the great sloping side of the wub. "It's a pig! A

huge dirty pig!"



"Yes sir, it's a pig. The natives call it a wub."



"A huge pig. It must weigh four hundred pounds." Franco grabbed a tuft

of the rough hair. The wub gasped. Its eyes opened, small and moist.

Then its great mouth twitched.



A tear rolled down the wub's cheek and splashed on the floor.



"Maybe it's good to eat," Peterson said nervously.



"We'll soon find out," Franco said.



       *       *       *       *       *



The wub survived the take-off, sound asleep in the hold of the ship.

When they were out in space and everything was running smoothly, Captain

Franco bade his men fetch the wub upstairs so that he might perceive

what manner of beast it was.



The wub grunted and wheezed, squeezing up the passageway.



"Come on," Jones grated, pulling at the rope. The wub twisted, rubbing

its skin off on the smooth chrome walls. It burst into the ante-room,

tumbling down in a heap. The men leaped up.



"Good Lord," French said. "What is it?"



"Peterson says it's a wub," Jones said. "It belongs to him." He kicked

at the wub. The wub stood up unsteadily, panting.



"What's the matter with it?" French came over. "Is it going to be sick?"



They watched. The wub rolled its eyes mournfully. It gazed around at the

men.



"I think it's thirsty," Peterson said. He went to get some water. French

shook his head.



"No wonder we had so much trouble taking off. I had to reset all my

ballast calculations."



Peterson came back with the water. The wub began to lap gratefully,

splashing the men.



Captain Franco appeared at the door.



"Let's have a look at it." He advanced, squinting critically. "You got

this for fifty cents?"



"Yes, sir," Peterson said. "It eats almost anything. I fed it on grain

and it liked that. And then potatoes, and mash, and scraps from the

table, and milk. It seems to enjoy eating. After it eats it lies down

and goes to sleep."



"I see," Captain Franco said. "Now, as to its taste. That's the real

question. I doubt if there's much point in fattening it up any more. It

seems fat enough to me already. Where's the cook? I want him here. I

want to find out--"



The wub stopped lapping and looked up at the Captain.



"Really, Captain," the wub said. "I suggest we talk of other matters."



The room was silent.



"What was that?" Franco said. "Just now."



"The wub, sir," Peterson said. "It spoke."



They all looked at the wub.



"What did it say? What did it say?"



"It suggested we talk about other things."



Franco walked toward the wub. He went all around it, examining it from

every side. Then he came back over and stood with the men.



"I wonder if there's a native inside it," he said thoughtfully. "Maybe

we should open it up and have a look."



"Oh, goodness!" the wub cried. "Is that all you people can think of,

killing and cutting?"



Franco clenched his fists. "Come out of there! Whoever you are, come

out!"



Nothing stirred. The men stood together, their faces blank, staring at

the wub. The wub swished its tail. It belched suddenly.



"I beg your pardon," the wub said.



"I don't think there's anyone in there," Jones said in a low voice. They

all looked at each other.



The cook came in.



"You wanted me, Captain?" he said. "What's this thing?"



"This is a wub," Franco said. "It's to be eaten. Will you measure it and

figure out--"



"I think we should have a talk," the wub said. "I'd like to discuss this

with you, Captain, if I might. I can see that you and I do not agree on

some basic issues."



The Captain took a long time to answer. The wub waited good-naturedly,

licking the water from its jowls.



"Come into my office," the Captain said at last. He turned and walked

out of the room. The wub rose and padded after him. The men watched it

go out. They heard it climbing the stairs.



"I wonder what the outcome will be," the cook said. "Well, I'll be in

the kitchen. Let me know as soon as you hear."



"Sure," Jones said. "Sure."



       *       *       *       *       *



The wub eased itself down in the corner with a sigh. "You must forgive

me," it said. "I'm afraid I'm addicted to various forms of relaxation.

When one is as large as I--"



The Captain nodded impatiently. He sat down at his desk and folded his

hands.



"All right," he said. "Let's get started. You're a wub? Is that

correct?"



The wub shrugged. "I suppose so. That's what they call us, the natives,

I mean. We have our own term."



"And you speak English? You've been in contact with Earthmen before?"



"No."



"Then how do you do it?"



"Speak English? Am I speaking English? I'm not conscious of speaking

anything in particular. I examined your mind--"



"My mind?"



"I studied the contents, especially the semantic warehouse, as I refer

to it--"



"I see," the Captain said. "Telepathy. Of course."



"We are a very old race," the wub said. "Very old and very ponderous. It

is difficult for us to move around. You can appreciate that anything so

slow and heavy would be at the mercy of more agile forms of life. There

was no use in our relying on physical defenses. How could we win? Too

heavy to run, too soft to fight, too good-natured to hunt for game--"



"How do you live?"



"Plants. Vegetables. We can eat almost anything. We're very catholic.

Tolerant, eclectic, catholic. We live and let live. That's how we've

gotten along."



The wub eyed the Captain.



"And that's why I so violently objected to this business about having me

boiled. I could see the image in your mind--most of me in the frozen

food locker, some of me in the kettle, a bit for your pet cat--"



"So you read minds?" the Captain said. "How interesting. Anything else?

I mean, what else can you do along those lines?"



"A few odds and ends," the wub said absently, staring around the room.

"A nice apartment you have here, Captain. You keep it quite neat. I

respect life-forms that are tidy. Some Martian birds are quite tidy.

They throw things out of their nests and sweep them--"



"Indeed." The Captain nodded. "But to get back to the problem--"



"Quite so. You spoke of dining on me. The taste, I am told, is good. A

little fatty, but tender. But how can any lasting contact be established

between your people and mine if you resort to such barbaric attitudes?

Eat me? Rather you should discuss questions with me, philosophy, the

arts--"



The Captain stood up. "Philosophy. It might interest you to know that we

will be hard put to find something to eat for the next month. An

unfortunate spoilage--"



"I know." The wub nodded. "But wouldn't it be more in accord with your

principles of democracy if we all drew straws, or something along that

line? After all, democracy is to protect the minority from just such

infringements. Now, if each of us casts one vote--"



The Captain walked to the door.



"Nuts to you," he said. He opened the door. He opened his mouth.



He stood frozen, his mouth wide, his eyes staring, his fingers still on

the knob.



The wub watched him. Presently it padded out of the room, edging past

the Captain. It went down the hall, deep in meditation.



       *       *       *       *       *



The room was quiet.



"So you see," the wub said, "we have a common myth. Your mind contains

many familiar myth symbols. Ishtar, Odysseus--"



Peterson sat silently, staring at the floor. He shifted in his chair.



"Go on," he said. "Please go on."



"I find in your Odysseus a figure common to the mythology of most

self-conscious races. As I interpret it, Odysseus wanders as an

individual, aware of himself as such. This is the idea of separation, of

separation from family and country. The process of individuation."



"But Odysseus returns to his home." Peterson looked out the port window,

at the stars, endless stars, burning intently in the empty universe.

"Finally he goes home."



"As must all creatures. The moment of separation is a temporary period,

a brief journey of the soul. It begins, it ends. The wanderer returns to

land and race...."



The door opened. The wub stopped, turning its great head.



Captain Franco came into the room, the men behind him. They hesitated at

the door.



"Are you all right?" French said.



"Do you mean me?" Peterson said, surprised. "Why me?"



Franco lowered his gun. "Come over here," he said to Peterson. "Get up

and come here."



There was silence.



"Go ahead," the wub said. "It doesn't matter."



Peterson stood up. "What for?"



"It's an order."



Peterson walked to the door. French caught his arm.



"What's going on?" Peterson wrenched loose. "What's the matter with

you?"



Captain Franco moved toward the wub. The wub looked up from where it lay

in the corner, pressed against the wall.



"It is interesting," the wub said, "that you are obsessed with the idea

of eating me. I wonder why."



"Get up," Franco said.



"If you wish." The wub rose, grunting. "Be patient. It is difficult for

me." It stood, gasping, its tongue lolling foolishly.



"Shoot it now," French said.



"For God's sake!" Peterson exclaimed. Jones turned to him quickly, his

eyes gray with fear.



"You didn't see him--like a statue, standing there, his mouth open. If

we hadn't come down, he'd still be there."



"Who? The Captain?" Peterson stared around. "But he's all right now."



They looked at the wub, standing in the middle of the room, its great

chest rising and falling.



"Come on," Franco said. "Out of the way."



The men pulled aside toward the door.



"You are quite afraid, aren't you?" the wub said. "Have I done anything

to you? I am against the idea of hurting. All I have done is try to

protect myself. Can you expect me to rush eagerly to my death? I am a

sensible being like yourselves. I was curious to see your ship, learn

about you. I suggested to the native--"



The gun jerked.



"See," Franco said. "I thought so."



The wub settled down, panting. It put its paw out, pulling its tail

around it.



"It is very warm," the wub said. "I understand that we are close to the

jets. Atomic power. You have done many wonderful things with

it--technically. Apparently, your scientific hierarchy is not equipped

to solve moral, ethical--"



Franco turned to the men, crowding behind him, wide-eyed, silent.



"I'll do it. You can watch."



French nodded. "Try to hit the brain. It's no good for eating. Don't hit

the chest. If the rib cage shatters, we'll have to pick bones out."



"Listen," Peterson said, licking his lips. "Has it done anything? What

harm has it done? I'm asking you. And anyhow, it's still mine. You have

no right to shoot it. It doesn't belong to you."



Franco raised his gun.



"I'm going out," Jones said, his face white and sick. "I don't want to

see it."



"Me, too," French said. The men straggled out, murmuring. Peterson

lingered at the door.



"It was talking to me about myths," he said. "It wouldn't hurt anyone."



He went outside.



Franco walked toward the wub. The wub looked up slowly. It swallowed.



"A very foolish thing," it said. "I am sorry that you want to do it.

There was a parable that your Saviour related--"



It stopped, staring at the gun.



"Can you look me in the eye and do it?" the wub said. "Can you do that?"



The Captain gazed down. "I can look you in the eye," he said. "Back on

the farm we had hogs, dirty razor-back hogs. I can do it."



Staring down at the wub, into the gleaming, moist eyes, he pressed the

trigger.



       *       *       *       *       *



The taste was excellent.



They sat glumly around the table, some of them hardly eating at all. The

only one who seemed to be enjoying himself was Captain Franco.



"More?" he said, looking around. "More? And some wine, perhaps."



"Not me," French said. "I think I'll go back to the chart room."



"Me, too." Jones stood up, pushing his chair back. "I'll see you later."



The Captain watched them go. Some of the others excused themselves.



"What do you suppose the matter is?" the Captain said. He turned to

Peterson. Peterson sat staring down at his plate, at the potatoes, the

green peas, and at the thick slab of tender, warm meat.



He opened his mouth. No sound came.



The Captain put his hand on Peterson's shoulder.



"It is only organic matter, now," he said. "The life essence is gone."

He ate, spooning up the gravy with some bread. "I, myself, love to eat.

It is one of the greatest things that a living creature can enjoy.

Eating, resting, meditation, discussing things."



Peterson nodded. Two more men got up and went out. The Captain drank

some water and sighed.



"Well," he said. "I must say that this was a very enjoyable meal. All

the reports I had heard were quite true--the taste of wub. Very fine.

But I was prevented from enjoying this pleasure in times past."



He dabbed at his lips with his napkin and leaned back in his chair.

Peterson stared dejectedly at the table.



The Captain watched him intently. He leaned over.



"Come, come," he said. "Cheer up! Let's discuss things."



He smiled.



"As I was saying before I was interrupted, the role of Odysseus in the

myths--"



Peterson jerked up, staring.



"To go on," the Captain said. "Odysseus, as I understand him--"









Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ July 1952. Extensive

    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on

    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical

    errors have been corrected without note.











End of Project Gutenberg's Beyond Lies the Wub, by Philip Kindred Dick











Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net



















                         THE HANGING STRANGER



                          BY PHILIP K. DICK



                         ILLUSTRATED BY SMITH



[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Science Fiction

Adventures Magazine December 1953. Extensive research did not uncover

any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]





[Illustration]





    Ed had always been a practical man, when he saw something was wrong

    he tried to correct it. Then one day he saw _it_ hanging in the town

    square.





Five o'clock Ed Loyce washed up, tossed on his hat and coat, got his car

out and headed across town toward his TV sales store. He was tired. His

back and shoulders ached from digging dirt out of the basement and

wheeling it into the back yard. But for a forty-year-old man he had done

okay. Janet could get a new vase with the money he had saved; and he

liked the idea of repairing the foundations himself!



It was getting dark. The setting sun cast long rays over the scurrying

commuters, tired and grim-faced, women loaded down with bundles and

packages, students swarming home from the university, mixing with clerks

and businessmen and drab secretaries. He stopped his Packard for a red

light and then started it up again. The store had been open without him;

he'd arrive just in time to spell the help for dinner, go over the

records of the day, maybe even close a couple of sales himself. He drove

slowly past the small square of green in the center of the street, the

town park. There were no parking places in front of LOYCE TV SALES AND

SERVICE. He cursed under his breath and swung the car in a U-turn. Again

he passed the little square of green with its lonely drinking fountain

and bench and single lamppost.



From the lamppost something was hanging. A shapeless dark bundle,

swinging a little with the wind. Like a dummy of some sort. Loyce rolled

down his window and peered out. What the hell was it? A display of

some kind? Sometimes the Chamber of Commerce put up displays in the

square.



Again he made a U-turn and brought his car around. He passed the park

and concentrated on the dark bundle. It wasn't a dummy. And if it was a

display it was a strange kind. The hackles on his neck rose and he

swallowed uneasily. Sweat slid out on his face and hands.



It was a body. A human body.



       *       *       *       *       *



"Look at it!" Loyce snapped. "Come on out here!"



Don Fergusson came slowly out of the store, buttoning his pin-stripe

coat with dignity. "This is a big deal, Ed. I can't just leave the guy

standing there."



"See it?" Ed pointed into the gathering gloom. The lamppost jutted up

against the sky--the post and the bundle swinging from it. "There it is.

How the hell long has it been there?" His voice rose excitedly. "What's

wrong with everybody? They just walk on past!"



Don Fergusson lit a cigarette slowly. "Take it easy, old man. There must

be a good reason, or it wouldn't be there."



"A reason! What kind of a reason?"



Fergusson shrugged. "Like the time the Traffic Safety Council put that

wrecked Buick there. Some sort of civic thing. How would I know?"



Jack Potter from the shoe shop joined them. "What's up, boys?"



"There's a body hanging from the lamppost," Loyce said. "I'm going to

call the cops."



"They must know about it," Potter said. "Or otherwise it wouldn't be

there."



"I got to get back in." Fergusson headed back into the store. "Business

before pleasure."



Loyce began to get hysterical. "You see it? You see it hanging there? A

man's body! A dead man!"



"Sure, Ed. I saw it this afternoon when I went out for coffee."



"You mean it's been there all afternoon?"



"Sure. What's the matter?" Potter glanced at his watch. "Have to run.

See you later, Ed."



Potter hurried off, joining the flow of people moving along the

sidewalk. Men and women, passing by the park. A few glanced up curiously

at the dark bundle--and then went on. Nobody stopped. Nobody paid any

attention.



"I'm going nuts," Loyce whispered. He made his way to the curb and

crossed out into traffic, among the cars. Horns honked angrily at him.

He gained the curb and stepped up onto the little square of green.



The man had been middle-aged. His clothing was ripped and torn, a gray

suit, splashed and caked with dried mud. A stranger. Loyce had never

seen him before. Not a local man. His face was partly turned, away, and

in the evening wind he spun a little, turning gently, silently. His skin

was gouged and cut. Red gashes, deep scratches of congealed blood. A

pair of steel-rimmed glasses hung from one ear, dangling foolishly. His

eyes bulged. His mouth was open, tongue thick and ugly blue.



"For Heaven's sake," Loyce muttered, sickened. He pushed down his nausea

and made his way back to the sidewalk. He was shaking all over, with

revulsion--and fear.



_Why?_ Who was the man? Why was he hanging there? What did it mean?



And--why didn't anybody notice?



He bumped into a small man hurrying along the sidewalk. "Watch it!" the

man grated, "Oh, it's you, Ed."



Ed nodded dazedly. "Hello, Jenkins."



"What's the matter?" The stationery clerk caught Ed's arm. "You look

sick."



"The body. There in the park."



"Sure, Ed." Jenkins led him into the alcove of LOYCE TV SALES AND

SERVICE. "Take it easy."



Margaret Henderson from the jewelry store joined them. "Something

wrong?"



"Ed's not feeling well."



Loyce yanked himself free. "How can you stand here? Don't you see it?

For God's sake--"



"What's he talking about?" Margaret asked nervously.



"The body!" Ed shouted. "The body hanging there!"



More people collected. "Is he sick? It's Ed Loyce. You okay, Ed?"



"The body!" Loyce screamed, struggling to get past them. Hands caught at

him. He tore loose. "Let me go! The police! Get the police!"



"Ed--"



"Better get a doctor!"



"He must be sick."



"Or drunk."



Loyce fought his way through the people. He stumbled and half fell.

Through a blur he saw rows of faces, curious, concerned, anxious. Men

and women halting to see what the disturbance was. He fought past them

toward his store. He could see Fergusson inside talking to a man,

showing him an Emerson TV set. Pete Foley in the back at the service

counter, setting up a new Philco. Loyce shouted at them frantically.

His voice was lost in the roar of traffic and the murmur around him.



"Do something!" he screamed. "Don't stand there! Do something!

Something's wrong! Something's happened! Things are going on!"



The crowd melted respectfully for the two heavy-set cops moving

efficiently toward Loyce.



       *       *       *       *       *



"Name?" the cop with the notebook murmured.



"Loyce." He mopped his forehead wearily. "Edward C. Loyce. Listen to me.

Back there--"



"Address?" the cop demanded. The police car moved swiftly through

traffic, shooting among the cars and buses. Loyce sagged against the

seat, exhausted and confused. He took a deep shuddering breath.



"1368 Hurst Road."



"That's here in Pikeville?"



"That's right." Loyce pulled himself up with a violent effort. "Listen

to me. Back there. In the square. Hanging from the lamppost--"



"Where were you today?" the cop behind the wheel demanded.



"Where?" Loyce echoed.



"You weren't in your shop, were you?"



"No." He shook his head. "No, I was home. Down in the basement."



"In the _basement_?"



"Digging. A new foundation. Getting out the dirt to pour a cement frame.

Why? What has that to do with--"



"Was anybody else down there with you?"



"No. My wife was downtown. My kids were at school." Loyce looked from

one heavy-set cop to the other. Hope flicked across his face, wild hope.

"You mean because I was down there I missed--the explanation? I didn't

get in on it? Like everybody else?"



After a pause the cop with the notebook said: "That's right. You missed

the explanation."



"Then it's official? The body--it's _supposed_ to be hanging there?"



"It's supposed to be hanging there. For everybody to see."



Ed Loyce grinned weakly. "Good Lord. I guess I sort of went off the deep

end. I thought maybe something had happened. You know, something like

the Ku Klux Klan. Some kind of violence. Communists or Fascists taking

over." He wiped his face with his breast-pocket handkerchief, his hands

shaking. "I'm glad to know it's on the level."



"It's on the level." The police car was getting near the Hall of

Justice. The sun had set. The streets were gloomy and dark. The lights

had not yet come on.



"I feel better," Loyce said. "I was pretty excited there, for a minute.

I guess I got all stirred up. Now that I understand, there's no need to

take me in, is there?"



The two cops said nothing.



"I should be back at my store. The boys haven't had dinner. I'm all

right, now. No more trouble. Is there any need of--"



"This won't take long," the cop behind the wheel interrupted. "A short

process. Only a few minutes."



"I hope it's short," Loyce muttered. The car slowed down for a

stoplight. "I guess I sort of disturbed the peace. Funny, getting

excited like that and--"



Loyce yanked the door open. He sprawled out into the street and rolled

to his feet. Cars were moving all around him, gaining speed as the light

changed. Loyce leaped onto the curb and raced among the people,

burrowing into the swarming crowds. Behind him he heard sounds, shouts,

people running.



They weren't cops. He had realized that right away. He knew every cop in

Pikeville. A man couldn't own a store, operate a business in a small

town for twenty-five years without getting to know all the cops.



They weren't cops--and there hadn't been any explanation. Potter,

Fergusson, Jenkins, none of them knew why it was there. They didn't

know--and they didn't care. _That_ was the strange part.



Loyce ducked into a hardware store. He raced toward the back, past the

startled clerks and customers, into the shipping room and through the

back door. He tripped over a garbage can and ran up a flight of concrete

steps. He climbed over a fence and jumped down on the other side,

gasping and panting.



There was no sound behind him. He had got away.



He was at the entrance of an alley, dark and strewn with boards and

ruined boxes and tires. He could see the street at the far end. A street

light wavered and came on. Men and women. Stores. Neon signs. Cars.



And to his right--the police station.



He was close, terribly close. Past the loading platform of a grocery

store rose the white concrete side of the Hall of Justice. Barred

windows. The police antenna. A great concrete wall rising up in the

darkness. A bad place for him to be near. He was too close. He had to

keep moving, get farther away from them.



_Them?_



Loyce moved cautiously down the alley. Beyond the police station was the

City Hall, the old-fashioned yellow structure of wood and gilded brass

and broad cement steps. He could see the endless rows of offices, dark

windows, the cedars and beds of flowers on each side of the entrance.



And--something else.



Above the City Hall was a patch of darkness, a cone of gloom denser than

the surrounding night. A prism of black that spread out and was lost

into the sky.



He listened. Good God, he could hear something. Something that made him

struggle frantically to close his ears, his mind, to shut out the sound.

A buzzing. A distant, muted hum like a great swarm of bees.



Loyce gazed up, rigid with horror. The splotch of darkness, hanging over

the City Hall. Darkness so thick it seemed almost solid. _In the vortex

something moved._ Flickering shapes. Things, descending from the sky,

pausing momentarily above the City Hall, fluttering over it in a dense

swarm and then dropping silently onto the roof.



Shapes. Fluttering shapes from the sky. From the crack of darkness that

hung above him.



He was seeing--them.



       *       *       *       *       *



For a long time Loyce watched, crouched behind a sagging fence in a pool

of scummy water.



They were landing. Coming down in groups, landing on the roof of the

City Hall and disappearing inside. They had wings. Like giant insects of

some kind. They flew and fluttered and came to rest--and then crawled

crab-fashion, sideways, across the roof and into the building.



He was sickened. And fascinated. Cold night wind blew around him and he

shuddered. He was tired, dazed with shock. On the front steps of the

City Hall were men, standing here and there. Groups of men coming out of

the building and halting for a moment before going on.



Were there more of them?



It didn't seem possible. What he saw descending from the black chasm

weren't men. They were alien--from some other world, some other

dimension. Sliding through this slit, this break in the shell of the

universe. Entering through this gap, winged insects from another realm

of being.



On the steps of the City Hall a group of men broke up. A few moved

toward a waiting car. One of the remaining shapes started to re-enter

the City Hall. It changed its mind and turned to follow the others.



Loyce closed his eyes in horror. His senses reeled. He hung on tight,

clutching at the sagging fence. The shape, the man-shape, had abruptly

fluttered up and flapped after the others. It flew to the sidewalk and

came to rest among them.



Pseudo-men. Imitation men. Insects with ability to disguise themselves

as men. Like other insects familiar to Earth. Protective coloration.

Mimicry.



Loyce pulled himself away. He got slowly to his feet. It was night. The

alley was totally dark. But maybe they could see in the dark. Maybe

darkness made no difference to them.



He left the alley cautiously and moved out onto the street. Men and

women flowed past, but not so many, now. At the bus-stops stood waiting

groups. A huge bus lumbered along the street, its lights flashing in the

evening gloom.



Loyce moved forward. He pushed his way among those waiting and when the

bus halted he boarded it and took a seat in the rear, by the door. A

moment later the bus moved into life and rumbled down the street.



       *       *       *       *       *



Loyce relaxed a little. He studied the people around him. Dulled, tired

faces. People going home from work. Quite ordinary faces. None of them

paid any attention to him. All sat quietly, sunk down in their seats,

jiggling with the motion of the bus.



The man sitting next to him unfolded a newspaper. He began to read the

sports section, his lips moving. An ordinary man. Blue suit. Tie. A

businessman, or a salesman. On his way home to his wife and family.



Across the aisle a young woman, perhaps twenty. Dark eyes and hair, a

package on her lap. Nylons and heels. Red coat and white angora sweater.

Gazing absently ahead of her.



A high school boy in jeans and black jacket.



A great triple-chinned woman with an immense shopping bag loaded with

packages and parcels. Her thick face dim with weariness.



Ordinary people. The kind that rode the bus every evening. Going home to

their families. To dinner.



Going home--with their minds dead. Controlled, filmed over with the mask

of an alien being that had appeared and taken possession of them, their

town, their lives. Himself, too. Except that he happened to be deep in

his cellar instead of in the store. Somehow, he had been overlooked.

They had missed him. Their control wasn't perfect, foolproof.



Maybe there were others.



Hope flickered in Loyce. They weren't omnipotent. They had made a

mistake, not got control of him. Their net, their field of control, had

passed over him. He had emerged from his cellar as he had gone down.

Apparently their power-zone was limited.



A few seats down the aisle a man was watching him. Loyce broke off his

chain of thought. A slender man, with dark hair and a small mustache.

Well-dressed, brown suit and shiny shoes. A book between his small

hands. He was watching Loyce, studying him intently. He turned quickly

away.



Loyce tensed. One of _them_? Or--another they had missed?



The man was watching him again. Small dark eyes, alive and clever.

Shrewd. A man too shrewd for them--or one of the things itself, an alien

insect from beyond.



The bus halted. An elderly man got on slowly and dropped his token into

the box. He moved down the aisle and took a seat opposite Loyce.



The elderly man caught the sharp-eyed man's gaze. For a split second

something passed between them.



A look rich with meaning.



Loyce got to his feet. The bus was moving. He ran to the door. One step

down into the well. He yanked the emergency door release. The rubber

door swung open.



"Hey!" the driver shouted, jamming on the brakes. "What the hell--"



Loyce squirmed through. The bus was slowing down. Houses on all sides. A

residential district, lawns and tall apartment buildings. Behind him,

the bright-eyed man had leaped up. The elderly man was also on his feet.

They were coming after him.



Loyce leaped. He hit the pavement with terrific force and rolled against

the curb. Pain lapped over him. Pain and a vast tide of blackness.

Desperately, he fought it off. He struggled to his knees and then slid

down again. The bus had stopped. People were getting off.



Loyce groped around. His fingers closed over something. A rock, lying in

the gutter. He crawled to his feet, grunting with pain. A shape loomed

before him. A man, the bright-eyed man with the book.



Loyce kicked. The man gasped and fell. Loyce brought the rock down. The

man screamed and tried to roll away. "_Stop!_ For God's sake listen--"



He struck again. A hideous crunching sound. The man's voice cut off and

dissolved in a bubbling wail. Loyce scrambled up and back. The others

were there, now. All around him. He ran, awkwardly, down the sidewalk,

up a driveway. None of them followed him. They had stopped and were

bending over the inert body of the man with the book, the bright-eyed

man who had come after him.



Had he made a mistake?



But it was too late to worry about that. He had to get out--away from

them. Out of Pikeville, beyond the crack of darkness, the rent between

their world and his.



       *       *       *       *       *



"Ed!" Janet Loyce backed away nervously. "What is it? What--"



Ed Loyce slammed the door behind him and came into the living room.

"Pull down the shades. Quick."



Janet moved toward the window. "But--"



"Do as I say. Who else is here besides you?"



"Nobody. Just the twins. They're upstairs in their room. What's

happened? You look so strange. Why are you home?"



Ed locked the front door. He prowled around the house, into the kitchen.

From the drawer under the sink he slid out the big butcher knife and ran

his finger along it. Sharp. Plenty sharp. He returned to the living

room.



"Listen to me," he said. "I don't have much time. They know I escaped

and they'll be looking for me."



"Escaped?" Janet's face twisted with bewilderment and fear. "Who?"



"The town has been taken over. They're in control. I've got it pretty

well figured out. They started at the top, at the City Hall and police

department. What they did with the _real_ humans they--"



"What are you talking about?"



"We've been invaded. From some other universe, some other dimension.

They're insects. Mimicry. And more. Power to control minds. Your mind."



"My mind?"



"Their entrance is _here_, in Pikeville. They've taken over all of you.

The whole town--except me. We're up against an incredibly powerful

enemy, but they have their limitations. That's our hope. They're

limited! They can make mistakes!"



Janet shook her head. "I don't understand, Ed. You must be insane."



"Insane? No. Just lucky. If I hadn't been down in the basement I'd be

like all the rest of you." Loyce peered out the window. "But I can't

stand here talking. Get your coat."



"My coat?"



"We're getting out of here. Out of Pikeville. We've got to get help.

Fight this thing. They _can_ be beaten. They're not infallible. It's

going to be close--but we may make it if we hurry. Come on!" He grabbed

her arm roughly. "Get your coat and call the twins. We're all leaving.

Don't stop to pack. There's no time for that."



White-faced, his wife moved toward the closet and got down her coat.

"Where are we going?"



Ed pulled open the desk drawer and spilled the contents out onto the

floor. He grabbed up a road map and spread it open. "They'll have the

highway covered, of course. But there's a back road. To Oak Grove. I got

onto it once. It's practically abandoned. Maybe they'll forget about

it."



"The old Ranch Road? Good Lord--it's completely closed. Nobody's

supposed to drive over it."



"I know." Ed thrust the map grimly into his coat. "That's our best

chance. Now call down the twins and let's get going. Your car is full of

gas, isn't it?"



Janet was dazed.



"The Chevy? I had it filled up yesterday afternoon." Janet moved toward

the stairs. "Ed, I--"



"Call the twins!" Ed unlocked the front door and peered out. Nothing

stirred. No sign of life. All right so far.



"Come on downstairs," Janet called in a wavering voice. "We're--going

out for awhile."



"Now?" Tommy's voice came.



"Hurry up," Ed barked. "Get down here, both of you."



Tommy appeared at the top of the stairs. "I was doing my home work.

We're starting fractions. Miss Parker says if we don't get this done--"



"You can forget about fractions." Ed grabbed his son as he came down the

stairs and propelled him toward the door. "Where's Jim?"



"He's coming."



Jim started slowly down the stairs. "What's up, Dad?"



"We're going for a ride."



"A ride? Where?"



Ed turned to Janet. "We'll leave the lights on. And the TV set. Go turn

it on." He pushed her toward the set. "So they'll think we're still--"



He heard the buzz. And dropped instantly, the long butcher knife out.

Sickened, he saw it coming down the stairs at him, wings a blur of

motion as it aimed itself. It still bore a vague resemblance to Jimmy.

It was small, a baby one. A brief glimpse--the thing hurtling at him,

cold, multi-lensed inhuman eyes. Wings, body still clothed in yellow

T-shirt and jeans, the mimic outline still stamped on it. A strange

half-turn of its body as it reached him. What was it doing?



A stinger.



Loyce stabbed wildly at it. It retreated, buzzing frantically. Loyce

rolled and crawled toward the door. Tommy and Janet stood still as

statues, faces blank. Watching without expression. Loyce stabbed again.

This time the knife connected. The thing shrieked and faltered. It

bounced against the wall and fluttered down.



Something lapped through his mind. A wall of force, energy, an alien

mind probing into him. He was suddenly paralyzed. The mind entered his

own, touched against him briefly, shockingly. An utterly alien presence,

settling over him--and then it flickered out as the thing collapsed in a

broken heap on the rug.



It was dead. He turned it over with his foot. It was an insect, a fly of

some kind. Yellow T-shirt, jeans. His son Jimmy.... He closed his mind

tight. It was too late to think about that. Savagely he scooped up his

knife and headed toward the door. Janet and Tommy stood stone-still,

neither of them moving.



The car was out. He'd never get through. They'd be waiting for him. It

was ten miles on foot. Ten long miles over rough ground, gulleys and

open fields and hills of uncut forest. He'd have to go alone.



Loyce opened the door. For a brief second he looked back at his wife and

son. Then he slammed the door behind him and raced down the porch steps.



A moment later he was on his way, hurrying swiftly through the darkness

toward the edge of town.



       *       *       *       *       *



The early morning sunlight was blinding. Loyce halted, gasping for

breath, swaying back and forth. Sweat ran down in his eyes. His clothing

was torn, shredded by the brush and thorns through which he had crawled.

Ten miles--on his hands and knees. Crawling, creeping through the night.

His shoes were mud-caked. He was scratched and limping, utterly

exhausted.



But ahead of him lay Oak Grove.



He took a deep breath and started down the hill. Twice he stumbled and

fell, picking himself up and trudging on. His ears rang. Everything

receded and wavered. But he was there. He had got out, away from

Pikeville.



A farmer in a field gaped at him. From a house a young woman watched in

wonder. Loyce reached the road and turned onto it. Ahead of him was a

gasoline station and a drive-in. A couple of trucks, some chickens

pecking in the dirt, a dog tied with a string.



The white-clad attendant watched suspiciously as he dragged himself up

to the station. "Thank God." He caught hold of the wall. "I didn't think

I was going to make it. They followed me most of the way. I could hear

them buzzing. Buzzing and flitting around behind me."



"What happened?" the attendant demanded. "You in a wreck? A hold-up?"



Loyce shook his head wearily. "They have the whole town. The City Hall

and the police station. They hung a man from the lamppost. That was the

first thing I saw. They've got all the roads blocked. I saw them

hovering over the cars coming in. About four this morning I got beyond

them. I knew it right away. I could feel them leave. And then the sun

came up."



The attendant licked his lip nervously. "You're out of your head. I

better get a doctor."



"Get me into Oak Grove," Loyce gasped. He sank down on the gravel.

"We've got to get started--cleaning them out. Got to get started right

away."



       *       *       *       *       *



They kept a tape recorder going all the time he talked. When he had

finished the Commissioner snapped off the recorder and got to his feet.

He stood for a moment, deep in thought. Finally he got out his

cigarettes and lit up slowly, a frown on his beefy face.



"You don't believe me," Loyce said.



The Commissioner offered him a cigarette. Loyce pushed it impatiently

away. "Suit yourself." The Commissioner moved over to the window and

stood for a time looking out at the town of Oak Grove. "I believe you,"

he said abruptly.



Loyce sagged. "Thank God."



"So you got away." The Commissioner shook his head. "You were down in

your cellar instead of at work. A freak chance. One in a million."



Loyce sipped some of the black coffee they had brought him. "I have a

theory," he murmured.



"What is it?"



"About them. Who they are. They take over one area at a time. Starting

at the top--the highest level of authority. Working down from there in a

widening circle. When they're firmly in control they go on to the next

town. They spread, slowly, very gradually. I think it's been going on

for a long time."



"A long time?"



"Thousands of years. I don't think it's new."



"Why do you say that?"



"When I was a kid.... A picture they showed us in Bible League. A

religious picture--an old print. The enemy gods, defeated by Jehovah.

Moloch, Beelzebub, Moab, Baalin, Ashtaroth--"



"So?"



"They were all represented by figures." Loyce looked up at the

Commissioner. "Beelzebub was represented as--a giant fly."



The Commissioner grunted. "An old struggle."



"They've been defeated. The Bible is an account of their defeats. They

make gains--but finally they're defeated."



"Why defeated?"



"They can't get everyone. They didn't get me. And they never got the

Hebrews. The Hebrews carried the message to the whole world. The

realization of the danger. The two men on the bus. I think they

understood. Had escaped, like I did." He clenched his fists. "I killed

one of them. I made a mistake. I was afraid to take a chance."



The Commissioner nodded. "Yes, they undoubtedly had escaped, as you did.

Freak accidents. But the rest of the town was firmly in control." He

turned from the window. "Well, Mr. Loyce. You seem to have figured

everything out."



"Not everything. The hanging man. The dead man hanging from the

lamppost. I don't understand that. _Why?_ Why did they deliberately hang

him there?"



"That would seem simple." The Commissioner smiled faintly. "_Bait._"



Loyce stiffened. His heart stopped beating. "Bait? What do you mean?"



"To draw you out. Make you declare yourself. So they'd know who was

under control--and who had escaped."



Loyce recoiled with horror. "Then they _expected_ failures! They

anticipated--" He broke off. "They were ready with a trap."



"And you showed yourself. You reacted. You made yourself known." The

Commissioner abruptly moved toward the door. "Come along, Loyce. There's

a lot to do. We must get moving. There's no time to waste."



Loyce started slowly to his feet, numbed. "And the man. _Who was the

man?_ I never saw him before. He wasn't a local man. He was a stranger.

All muddy and dirty, his face cut, slashed--"



There was a strange look on the Commissioner's face as he answered.

"Maybe," he said softly, "you'll understand that, too. Come along with

me, Mr. Loyce." He held the door open, his eyes gleaming. Loyce caught a

glimpse of the street in front of the police station. Policemen, a

platform of some sort. A telephone pole--and a rope! "Right this way,"

the Commissioner said, smiling coldly.



       *       *       *       *       *



As the sun set, the vice-president of the Oak Grove Merchants' Bank came

up out of the vault, threw the heavy time locks, put on his hat and

coat, and hurried outside onto the sidewalk. Only a few people were

there, hurrying home to dinner.



"Good night," the guard said, locking the door after him.



"Good night," Clarence Mason murmured. He started along the street

toward his car. He was tired. He had been working all day down in the

vault, examining the lay-out of the safety deposit boxes to see if there

was room for another tier. He was glad to be finished.



At the corner he halted. The street lights had not yet come on. The

street was dim. Everything was vague. He looked around--and froze.



From the telephone pole in front of the police station, something large

and shapeless hung. It moved a little with the wind.



What the hell was it?



Mason approached it warily. He wanted to get home. He was tired and

hungry. He thought of his wife, his kids, a hot meal on the dinner

table. But there was something about the dark bundle, something ominous

and ugly. The light was bad; he couldn't tell what it was. Yet it drew

him on, made him move closer for a better look. The shapeless thing made

him uneasy. He was frightened by it. Frightened--and fascinated.



And the strange part was that nobody else seemed to notice it.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hanging Stranger, by Philip K. Dick



